<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<p>The Whittakers were At Home every Wednesday. No one else in Hammerton Chase was officially At Home at any time. So everyone went to the Whittakers’ on Wednesdays.</p>
			<p>There are still a few intimate corners in London where people, other than the poor, are positively acquainted with their neighbours. And Hammerton Chase is one of these. In heartless Kensington we know no more of our neighbour than we may gather from furtive references to the Red Book and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Who’s Who</i>, or stealthy reconnaissances from behind the dining-room curtains as he goes forth in the morning to his work and to his labour. Our communication with him is limited to the throwing back over the garden-wall of his children’s balls, aeroplanes, and spears, or⁠—in the lowest parts of Kensington⁠—to testy hammerings with the fire-irons towards the close of his musical evenings. Overt, deliberate, avoidable, social intercourse with any person living in the same street or the same block of mansions is a thing unknown. What true Londoner remembers going to an At Home, a dance, a musical evening, or other entertainment in his own street? Who is there who regards with friendship the occupant of the opposite flat?</p>
			<p>Hammerton Chase could scarcely be regarded as a street. A short half-mile of old and dignified houses, clustered irregularly in all shapes and sizes along the sunny side of the Thames, with large trees and little gardens fringing the bank across the road, and, lying opposite, the Island, a long triangle of young willows, the haunt of wild duck and heron and swan⁠—it had a unique, incomparable character of its own. It was like neither street, nor road, nor avenue, nor garden, nor any other urban unit of place in London, or indeed, it was locally supposed, in the world. It had something, perhaps, of an old village and something of a Cathedral Close, something of Venice and something of the sea. But it was sui generis. It was The Chase, <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">W</abbr> 6. And the <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">W</abbr> 6 was generally considered to be superfluous.</p>
			<p>But, whatever it was, it prided itself on the intimate and sociable relations of its members. They were all on friendly terms with each other, and knew exactly the circumstances and employment, the ambitions, plans, and domestic crises of each other at any given moment. They “dropped in” at each other’s houses for conversation and informal entertainment; they borrowed wineglasses for their dinner-parties and tools for their gardens and anchors for their boats. They were a community, a self-sufficient community, isolated geographically from their natural homes in Chelsea and Kensington, <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">W</abbr>, by the dreary wilderness of West Kensington and the barbarous expanse of Hammersmith, and clinging almost pathetically together in their little oasis of civilization.</p>
			<p>And yet they were not suburban. They were in physical fact on the actual borders of London County; they were six miles from Charing Cross. But Ealing and the suburbs are farther still. And the soul of Ealing was many leagues removed from the soul of The Chase, which, like The Chase, was something not elsewhere to be discovered.</p>
			<p>So that on Wednesdays the Whittakers were At Home in the evening, and everyone went. Andrew Whittaker was an artist and art-critic; though for various reasons he devoted more time to criticism than to execution. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker wrote novels in the intervals of engaging a new servant or dismissing an old one, and grappling undaunted with the domestic crisis which either operation produced. They were both exceedingly pleasant, cultivated, and feckless people, and they well represented the soul of The Chase. Indeed, no one else was so well fitted to collect the bodies of The Chase together on Wednesdays.</p>
			<p>On this Wednesday there were fewer bodies than usual in the grey drawing-room. It was a moist and thunderous evening, very heavy and still, and many of The Chase were gasping quietly in their own little gardens, reluctant to enter a house of any kind. And there were one or two households vaguely “away in the country.” It was rather the habit of true members of The Chase to “go away” in May, or in June, or in any month but August, not simply because it was a wise and sensible thing to do, August being an overrated and tumultuous month in the country, not only because if you lived in the airy Chase the common craving of Londoners to escape from London in August did not affect you, but chiefly because if you lived in The Chase that was the kind of thing you did.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker was a little distressed by the meagre attendance. Six or seven ladies of The Chase, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple, the barrister, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mard, the architect, and his wife were there; but these were all elderly and unexciting, and without some powerful stimulus from the outer world it was impossible to prevent them from discussing food and domestic servants. Domestic worries dominated their lives. Life in The Chase was one long domestic worry. And the great problem of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker’s At Homes was to prevent people from talking about servants, food, and domestic worries. Her method was to invite large numbers of artistic, literary, and otherwise interesting people from distant London, who were apparently immune from domestic worries or were at any rate capable of excluding them from their conversation. The artistic element was thinly represented this evening by a psychologist from Oxford and a dramatic critic. But, nobly though they strove to discuss the drama and the mind, they were hopelessly swamped by a loud discussion on domestic servants and food among the ladies of The Chase, vigorously led by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Church. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ralph Vincent was a carroty-haired lady of extraordinary aggressiveness and defiant juvenility in the face of her forty-five summers and seven children. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Church was the widow-daughter of old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose, who was ninety and extremely deaf. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Church herself had an unfortunate stutter. Yet these two ladies, living together at Island View, practically constituted the Intelligence Staff of The Chase. They knew everything. They never went out, except on Wednesdays to the Whittakers’, when the indomitable <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose strode unaided under the splendid elms to Willow House and laboured by stages up the narrow stairs. But their agents came to them daily for teas and “little talks,” and handed over, willingly or no, the secrets of The Chase. Nor could it be said that either of them knew more or less than the other. Old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose prided herself on her lipreading, and no doubt <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Church’s unfortunate impediment made it easier for the old lady to practise this art to advantage. Some said, indeed, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Church’s stutter had been assumed in filial piety for this very purpose.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose was busily endeavouring to read the lips of the psychologist and the dramatic critic, whom she suspected of being engaged in a discussion of unusual interest, if not actual indelicacy. People who knew of her supposed gift felt sometimes very uncomfortable about conversation in her presence, especially if they were speaking to some reckless person who did not know of it.</p>
			<p>The voice of the psychologist was heard protesting to his host the sincerity and thoroughness of the Oxford method. Whittaker stood patiently in front of him with a trayful of homemade cocktails. “We <em>make</em> them concentrate⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="la">a priori</i>⁠ ⁠… processes of thought⁠ ⁠… lectures⁠ ⁠… philosophy⁠ ⁠… system.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Then domesticity broke out again, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker, listening with one ear to each party, raged furiously within. “Mary takes the children in the morning⁠ ⁠… the gas-oven⁠ ⁠… margarine⁠ ⁠… the geyser⁠ ⁠… the front doorstep⁠ ⁠… pull out the damper⁠ ⁠… simply walked out of the house⁠ ⁠… margarine⁠ ⁠… <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Walker’s Bureau⁠ ⁠… butter⁠ ⁠… very good references⁠ ⁠… margarine⁠ ⁠… the principles of reasoning⁠ ⁠… what about Susan?⁠ ⁠… margarine⁠ ⁠… a month’s wages⁠ ⁠… margarine⁠ ⁠… thought-circles⁠ ⁠… washing-up⁠ ⁠… a lady-help⁠ ⁠… margarine.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker despaired. Were none of her artistic circle coming? She went over to her husband and whispered fiercely, “Are the Byrnes coming? Go out and ring them up. Tell them they simply <em>must</em>.”</p>
			<p>Whittaker deposited his tray in the arms of the psychologist and went out; the psychologist assumed the air of one who is equal to any emergency, and sat solemnly embracing the tray.</p>
			<p>When Whittaker came back there was a wide grin on his pleasant face. He announced:</p>
			<p>“The Byrnes are coming in a minute⁠—and he’s bringing the Choir.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <em>good</em>,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker, and echoing approvals came from several of the company.</p>
			<p>The psychologist said, “Is that <em>Stephen</em> Byrne?” in an awed voice, and tried not to look as impressed and gratified as he felt when Whittaker assured him that it was. The elderly ladies looked more cheerful, and abandoned the barren topic of domestic worries to discuss poetry and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose said, “I <em>like</em> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne”; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Church said, “A <em>nice</em> man, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne”; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent said, “Such a <em>nice</em> couple, the Byrnes.”</p>
			<p>There were many accomplished people living in The Chase, but Stephen Byrne was the lion of them all; there were many delightful people living in The Chase, but Stephen Byrne was the darling of them all. He was the gem, the treasure of The Chase. Indeed, he was the treasure of England. He was a real poet. Men had heard of him before the war; but it was in the years of war that he had come to greatness. He was one of a few men who had been able in a few fine poems to set free for the nation a little of the imprisoned grandeur, the mute emotion of that time. But none of all those young men, who found their voices suddenly in the war and spoke with astonishment the splendid feelings of the people, had so touched the imagination, had so nearly expressed the tenderness of England, as Stephen Byrne. At twenty-seven he was a great man⁠—a national idol.</p>
			<p>No wonder, therefore, that The Chase delighted in him. But there was more. He was personally delightful. So many successful men are unusually ugly, or unusually bad-tempered, or soured, or boorish, or intolerably rude; and the people of The Chase, being essentially a critical people and far too noble to be capable of intellectual snobbery, would not have given their hearts to a successful poet if he had been ugly or boorish or intolerably rude. Stephen Byrne was none of these things⁠—but handsome and affable and beautifully mannered. And so they loved him.</p>
			<p>While they were waiting for him it grew dark and a little cooler, and more of The Chase came in. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dunk, the American, came in, and Petway, of the Needlework Guild, and Morrison, the publisher. After them came <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stimpson. Stimpson was a Civil Servant, but his lifework was cabinetmaking. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stimpson was an execrable housekeeper and mother, but knitted with extraordinary finish. Knitting was her craft; cabinetmaking was her husband’s craft. Everybody had a craft of some kind in The Chase. They all made things or did things, which nobody made or did in Kensington.</p>
			<p>Sometimes this making or doing was their profession; sometimes it was a parergon carried on deliciously in leisure hours. In either case it was the most important part of their lives. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dunk kept rabbits; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Farraday kept boats, and sailed interminably in his cutter or rowed about in an almost invisible dinghy. However innocent and respectable they looked, each of them, one felt, was capable of secret pottery, or privately addicted to modelling or engraving. There was nothing The Chase could not do.</p>
			<p>When these people came in the At Home brightened appreciably; there was a loud noise of really intelligent conversation, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker was satisfied. Whittaker laboured assiduously at his homemade cocktails, and was suitably rewarded by their rapid consumption. Whittaker’s cocktails had the advantages and the defects of an impromptu composition, which is precisely what they were. He was bound by no cast-iron rules as to ingredients in manufacture. But they were always powerful and generally popular; and most of the ladies attempted them if only because they were such a glorious gamble. Only <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose resolutely declined. And as they drank them they were all pleasurably excited by the imminent advent of Stephen Byrne.</p>
			<p>The door opened violently, striking the psychologist in the middle of the back, and a wave of people surged into the room, with much chattering and loud laughter. Towering in the centre of the mob was a huge clergyman, with large, round spectacles and a brick-red face, who reminded one instantly of Og, Gog, and Magog, however vague one’s previous impressions of those personages had been. He had a voice like a Tube train, rumbling far off in a tunnel, and his laugh was like the bursting of shells. He was six foot eight, and magnificently proportioned. With him was a man about twenty-seven, a Civil Servant and resident of The Chase, by name John Egerton. In front of these two, hopelessly dwarfed by the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter, were two young ladies⁠—and Stephen Byrne, a tall figure in a black velvet smoking-jacket.</p>
			<p>It said much for the personality, and indeed the person, of the young poet that in the arresting presence of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter most of the company looked immediately at Stephen Byrne. Many of them, indeed, thought it more seemly for some reason to conceal their interest, and went on talking or listening to their neighbours; they swivelled their eyes painfully towards the door without moving their heads, and suddenly said “Quite” or “Really” with a vain affectation of intelligence and usually in an inappropriate context.</p>
			<p>These were mostly men, who could not be expected openly to admit that there was present a more important male than themselves. But most of the women, and especially the older ones, regarded with evident admiration the black-haired, bonny celebrity of Hammerton Chase. It was very black, that hair, unbelievably black, and of a curious, attractive texture. One wanted to touch it. And, although he was a poet, it was not too long.</p>
			<p>Smiling happily under the light, Stephen Byrne was very good to look at. A high brow gave him a perhaps spurious suggestion of nobility, for the rest of the face was not so noble. The modern habit is to affix a label to every man, and be affronted if he forgets or ignores his label. But the most inveterate labeller would have been puzzled by the face of Stephen Byrne. In repose it was a handsome, impressive face, full of what is vaguely described as “breeding,” the nose straight and thin, the mouth firm and unobtrusive. One felt confidence, sympathy, attraction. But when he spoke or smiled, one thought again. There was attraction still, and for most people an immediate irresistible charm, but less confidence. There was a certain weakness in the mobile mouth, a certain fleshliness. You could imagine this young man being noble or mean, cruel or kind, good-humoured or petulant, selfish or magnanimous or simply damnable. Which is merely to say that he was a complicated affair. But if indeed he had a darker side, it had never been revealed to the people of The Chase; and they loved him.</p>
			<p>The two ladies were Margery Byrne, his wife, and Muriel Tarrant, a favourite niece of the Reverend Peter. They were both very fair, both very delightful without being exactly beautiful. Miss Muriel Tarrant was the sole unmarried and still marriageable maiden in The Chase. It was a curious thing; the female population of The Chase consisted almost entirely of married ladies, young or old, elderly ladies who were past that sort of thing, and small children. Muriel Tarrant swam like a solitary comet in this galaxy of fixed or immature stars. None could imagine why she remained single for a moment, so young and fresh and admirable she was. People indeed said that John Egerton⁠ ⁠… but no one knew.</p>
			<p>Muriel’s young brother, George Edwin, a tall youth with the precise features of Greek sculpture and the immaculate locks of a barber’s assistant, brought up the rear, looking a little dazed.</p>
			<p>There was a third young lady, disconcertingly tall and slightly abashed, and an obviously artistic youth in a blue collar, clinging timidly to the skirts of the party⁠—both strangers to The Chase.</p>
			<p>Stephen Byrne introduced them.</p>
			<p>“All these people,” he explained, with a comprehensive gesture, “do pottery and engraving. They are The Chase. Give me one of your cocktails, Whittaker. No⁠—give me two.”</p>
			<p>With two thin glasses of Whittaker’s latest concoction he walked over to old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose, watching him from her distant corner and wishing she was less old and less deaf, so that she could command the attentions of pleasant and distinguished young men. When he came to her she glowed with contentment like the harvest moon emerging from a mist, and to her own intense astonishment and the horror of her daughter was prevailed upon by Stephen to accept and actually consume the cocktail he had brought her. So excited was she, and so excited was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Church, her daughter, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Church’s stutter became altogether unconquerable, and the old lady’s lipreading became more than ever an adventure in guesswork. This meant a complete breakdown in their system of communications, which made conversation difficult. But Stephen chattered and sparkled undeterred, and the old ladies chuckled and crooned with satisfaction. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose thought he was talking about domestic servants, because she had lipread the word “cook.” In fact, he was talking nonsense about the origin of the word <em>cock</em>-tail, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Church kept trying to explain. But she never got further than, “He d⁠—d⁠—didn’t say c⁠—c⁠—<em>cook</em>, Mother⁠—he said c⁠—c⁠—c⁠—” because the old lady always interrupted with “Housemaids, ah⁠—yes,” and wagged her white head with profound meaning.</p>
			<p>The rumour travelled round the noisy room that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne had made <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose have a cocktail, and they all said, “How <em>like</em> him! the naughty old thing! No one else would have done <em>that</em>.” Margery Byrne was trying to make the dramatic critic talk about the drama, but he had come to the conclusion that no one in Hammerton liked to talk about anything but domestic worries. As he lived in a service flat and did not have any, it was far from easy for him, but he was doing his best, and had ascertained from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne that she had just engaged a new maid, named Emily, who seemed likely to be satisfactory. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne heard of her husband’s feat, she looked across at him fondly, but almost reproachfully. “That means he’s had three himself,” she said, with a gay laugh. The dramatic critic, who flattered himself that he had probed the depths of human nature, thought, “What a nice, easygoing wife!” But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne was really thinking, “I <em>wish</em> he wouldn’t drink so many⁠—horrid, strong stuff.”</p>
			<p>And she saw that, though her husband was being so pleasant and kind to the two old ladies, he was looking most of the time at Muriel Tarrant, the pretty girl in the corner beyond him, who was talking to John Egerton, and blushing prettily about something.</p>
			<p>Margery Byrne said to herself, “I am not jealous,” and looked away.</p>
			<p>An enormous chatter filled the room. The psychologist sat silent, noticing things. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Whittaker fussed about with coffee and thin glasses. Odd corners of tables and mantelpieces and bookshelves became crowded with discarded coffee-cups and dissipated glasses, perilously poised. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker, talking busily to the Reverend Peter, listened anxiously, with both ears at the public pulse, as it were, and could detect no single murmur of domestic worries. Everyone, it seemed, was being interesting and intelligent.</p>
			<p>Then the carroty-haired <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent bustled up to her. “<em>Won’t</em> you make them sing to us, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker?⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne’s Choir, I mean. I’ve never heard them, you know.”</p>
			<p>The Reverend Peter roared across the room, “A song, Stephen⁠—a song! Forward, the Choir!”</p>
			<p>The Hammerton Choir was the unduly dignified title of the faintly flippant, faintly musical company of pleasant people which the Byrnes gathered periodically at their house along The Chase. They sang, indeed, informally and wholly impromptu, a wide range of quartettes and choruses and glees. But volume of sound rather than delicacy of execution was their strong point, and the prevailing tone was frivolous. Indeed, it was scarcely in keeping with the sonorous title they had assumed; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent and others of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker’s guests, who had heard of the Hammerton Choir, but had not actually heard it, might be pardoned if they had formed too flattering an impression of its powers.</p>
			<p>Some of the Choir showed a certain bashfulness at the proposal that they should sing so publicly. John Egerton at first definitely refused, partly perhaps because he was happily occupied with Miss Muriel Tarrant in an almost impregnable corner. She, however, not wishing the company to suppose that she had any such thought, urged him into the arena; and Stephen Byrne prevailed upon the rest of his following. He himself showed no signs of bashfulness.</p>
			<p>Miss Tarrant was the Choir’s principal treble, and Stephen, bowing gallantly, escorted her with Miss Tiffany to the piano, a decayed and tinny instrument, with many photographs of children obliquely regarding each other on the top. Stephen sat at the piano, and the Reverend Peter stood stooping like a tired steeple beyond. He was, of course, the bass. The young man with the blue collar provided with John Egerton a throaty and wavering tenor. Egerton tried to stand next to Miss Tarrant, but was thwarted without intention by his companion tenor. Miss Tiffany grew slowly pinker and pinker. A solemn hush descended. The company held their breath.</p>
			<p>At the beginning of the Great War <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Asquith made a speech. In it he formulated the principles for which this nation was fighting. The formula was perfect and worthy of a great master of formulae, sonorous and dignified, yet not verbose. It said everything without saying a word too much. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Asquith was, justifiably, so pleased with it that for many years he lost no opportunity of publicly repeating it, or if he did not repeat it, of reminding people about it in speeches and pronouncements and letters to the Press. It began, “We shall not sheathe the sword,” and for a long time it was blazoned on every hoarding. Few men can have had so striking a literary success with four sentences.</p>
			<p>But over and above its conciseness and majesty and lucidity the formula had other qualities which may or may not have been consciously imparted to it by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Asquith. Its component sentences had the literary form of Hebraic poetry, the structure and rhythm of the Psalms. They might, indeed, have come out of the Psalms.</p>
			<p>But this was not all. One would understand the Prime Minister of England modelling some important literary composition on the style of the Psalms, which is a noble style. And that being so, one could understand the result being more or less easily adjustable to some one or other of those Church of England chants, which have done so much to popularize the Psalms of David. But the extraordinary thing about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Asquith’s formula was that it fitted exactly the Quadruple Chant, the unique and famous Quadruple Chant, designed by a benignant Church to make the longest Psalm that David composed less inexpressibly fatiguing than it would be to the music of a miserable single or double chant. There were four sentences in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Asquith’s formula. There were four musical sentences in the Quadruple Chant, each divided in twain. And they fitted each other like a glove, or, rather, like a well-fitting glove. It was marvellous. The only reasonable conclusion was that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Asquith, in a moment of pious exaltation, had deliberately set his formula to the Quadruple Chant.</p>
			<p>Alone of the English-speaking race Stephen Byrne had discovered these astounding truths. Having formed the conclusion that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Asquith had written the words to that chant, he held that one ought to sing the words to that chant. This would be the highest compliment to the man and the best means of perpetuating his work. And so, with many others, he did. But there is a season for all things; and it cannot be pretended that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker’s select and crowded At Home was the season for this particular thing.</p>
			<p>Stephen struck a chord. The company wondered what masterpiece was to be given them⁠—perhaps some Schubert, perhaps something from Gilbert and Sullivan.</p>
			<p>Then the great anthem rolled out. The voices of the Hammerton Choir were not individually of high quality, but they blended well, and their volume was surprising. They sang in excellent time, all stopping at the asterisks absolutely together, all accomplishing with perfect unanimity those long polysyllabic passages on one note which make psalm-singing in our churches so fruitful a source of precipitancy and schism.</p>
			<p>“We shall not sheathe the sword” (pause for breath), “which we ha̍ve not / lightly / drawn, / / until Belgium has recovered all* and <strong>mo̍re</strong> than / all that / she has / sacrificed.</p>
			<p>“Until France is adequa̍te / ly sec / ure̍d / / against the / menace / of ag / gression.”</p>
			<p>(The accentuation of <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ate</i> in “adequately” was the one blot on the pointing; it was unworthy of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Asquith.)</p>
			<p>“Until the rights of the smaller nationa̍lit / -ies of / Europe / / are placed upon an u̍nass / aila / ble found / ation / .”</p>
			<p>(That was a grand stanza; the Hammerton singers gave a delicious burlesque of the country choir gabbling with ever-growing speed through the first words, and falling with a luxurious snarl on their objective, the unfortunate accented syllable <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">al</i>.)</p>
			<p>“And until the military do̍min / ation of / Prussia / / is who̍lly and / final / ly dest / roye̍d.”</p>
			<p>(<em>Prussia</em> was given with a splendid crescendo of hate, worthy of the best Prussian traditions, and “destroy-e̍d” came with an effective rallentando.) The Reverend Peter Tarrant, rumbling in a profound bass the final “destroy-e̍d,” was so lifelike an imitation of a real clergyman leading a real village choir that those of the audience who had been slightly shocked by the whole performance became suddenly amused, and those who had not been shocked at all, which was a large majority, were reduced to the final stages of hysterical approval. The “turn” was a huge success. A roar of laughter and clapping and questioning followed the solemn ending. The Choir were urged to “do it again.” The two ladies, flushed and almost overcome by the applause, a circumstance quite new in the history of the Choir, begged to be excused; but Stephen once more constrained them. This time, closely following the best contemporary models on the variety stage, he urged the audience to assist, and produced from some mysterious source a number of copies of the words, neatly typed and pointed. And then, indeed, a wondrous thing was heard. For all that mixed but mainly respectable company rose up, and, opening timidly, rendered with an ever-increasing confidence and volume that profane and ridiculous hymn. Stephen Byrne stood superbly on a footstool and conducted with a poker, his black eyes flashing, his whole figure vital with excitement and mirth. And all those people were under his spell. Even the psychologist forbore for a moment to analyse the workings either of his own or any man’s mind, and concentrated genuinely on the correct pointing of his words, chuckling insanely at each half-verse. All of them chuckled and gurgled as they sang.</p>
			<p>But such is the hypnotic effect of any music with religious associations, and so powerful is the simple act of singing vigorously in unison as a generator of sentiment and solemnity in those who sing, that by the end of the third stanza they had forgotten that they were being funny, that the whole thing was a ridiculous joke, and discovered themselves, to Stephen’s intense dismay, chanting with long faces and tones of inexpressible fervour the pious resolution that the military domination of Prussia must be wholly and finally “destroy-e̍d.” They finished, almost with lumps in their throats, so moving was it all, and stood for a moment in a sheepish hush, half feeling that someone should say, “Let us pray,” or give out a text before they might sit down. Then someone cackled in the background, and the spell was broken with peals of insane laughter.</p>
			<p>While the hoarse company were having their glasses justifiably refilled, Margery Byrne came quickly up to her husband, and gave him the look which means to a husband, “I want to go home now.” She was tired and she looked tired; and she was going to have a baby. Stephen said, “Right you are, my dear⁠—just a minute.” He was talking now to the Reverend Peter and Muriel Tarrant, who was prettily flushed and a little excited. He was arguing with the Reverend Peter about the poetry of John Donne. He, too, was excited and pleased and reluctant to go home. But he knew that Margery ought to go home. And of such stuff are the real temptations of man.</p>
			<p>He looked an apology and an appeal at his wife and said, “One minute, my dear.⁠ ⁠… Would you mind?” knowing well that she minded. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne said that of course she did not mind, and went back to her seat by the dramatic critic, yawning furtively.</p>
			<p>So Stephen stood against the piano and defended John Donne, that strange Elizabethan mixture of piety and paganism and poetry and nastiness. He had forgotten <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Asquith now; he had forgotten the Choir and Muriel Tarrant, and he was absorbed in the serious pronouncement of an artistic belief. The Reverend Peter said that he was no prig, but some of John Donne was too much for him. He could not believe in the essential greatness of a grown man who could write such stuff. Stephen began to quote a line or two from memory; then he reached up for an old brown volume on one of Whittaker’s shelves and read from it in a low voice that only the clergyman could hear. “This is what I make of him,” he said. And he began to talk. He talked with the real eloquence of a master of words profoundly moved, with growing earnestness and vigour. He spoke of the eternal contradictions of human personality, of the amazing mixtures which make up men; how true was the saying of Samuel Butler that everything a man does is in a measure a picture of himself, yet how true it was that one could not confidently judge what a man was like from what he wrote. He told the Reverend Peter that he was narrow in his estimate⁠—unjust. One must strike a balance. Many of the company had gathered about him now, and were listening; Stephen saw this at last, and finished. Then the Reverend Peter laid a large hand affectionately on his shoulder and said, “You’re a wonderful man, Stephen. I surrender. I dare say I’ve wronged the fellow.⁠ ⁠… I’ll read him again.⁠ ⁠… You poets are certainly an odd mixture.” And that was the thought of all those who had heard the singing and listened to the talk.</p>
			<p>Stephen turned from him with a curious smile and saw suddenly the reproachful figure of his wife.</p>
			<p>He said, “Come along, my dear⁠—I’m so sorry! Are you coming, John?”</p>
			<p>Egerton looked across at Muriel Tarrant and her mother. They were entangled with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose and showed no signs of escaping. He said, “No⁠—I shall stay a little, I think.”</p>
			<p>In the hot darkness of The Chase Stephen took his wife’s arm, and knew at once that she was cross. They walked in silence to The House by the River and in silence entered the poky little hall. Stephen cursed himself; it was a stupid end to a jolly evening. In the hall he kissed her and said that he was sorry, and she sighed and smiled, and kissed him and went upstairs.</p>
			<p>Stephen walked reflectively into the dining-room and mixed himself a whisky and water. And as he drank, Emily Gaunt came up from the kitchen to ask if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne wanted tea. Emily Gaunt was the new maid. Stephen finished his whisky and noticed for the first time that she was pretty⁠—in a way.</p>
			<p>“No, thank you, Emily,” he said, and smiled at her. And Emily smiled.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
