<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
			<p>After the inquest The Chase had plenty to talk about. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Church were kept very busy. For few of The Chase had been actually present in the flesh⁠—not because they were not interested and curious and indeed aching to be present, but because it seemed hardly decent. Since the great Nuisance Case about the noise of the Quick Boat Company’s motorboats there had been no event of communal importance to The Chase; life had been a lamentable blank. And it was an ill-chance that the first genuine excitement, not counting the close of the Great War, should be a function which it seemed hardly decent to attend: an inquest on the dead body of a housemaid from The Chase discovered almost naked in a sack by a police-boat at Barnes. Nevertheless, a sprinkling of The Chase was there⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent for one, and Horace Dimple, the barrister, for another⁠—though he of course attended the inquest purely as a matter of professional interest, in the same laudable spirit of inquiry in which law students crowd to the more sensational or objectionable trials at the High Court. There were also <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mard, the architect, who was on the Borough Council, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tatham, who had to visit the Food Committee that day. These, being in the neighbourhood of the Court, thought it would be foolish not to “look in.” Few of them overtly acknowledged that the others were visibly there, or, if they were compelled to take notice, smiled thinly and looked faintly surprised.</p>
			<p>But so startling and sensational was the course of the inquest that when they returned to their homes any doubts about the propriety of attending it were speedily smothered by the important fact that they had positively been there, had been eyewitnesses of the astonishing scene, whether from chance or compassion or curiosity, or wisdom, or simple power of divination, which most of them felt they must undoubtedly possess. They had known all along that there was “something fishy” about that girl’s disappearance, and now, you see, they were right. They looked eagerly in the morning papers and in the evening papers as only those look who have seen something actually take place, and insanely crave to see it reported in dirty print in the obscure corners of a newspaper. So do men who happen on a day to hear part of a Parliamentary debate anxiously study on the morrow the Parliamentary reports at which they have never so much as glanced before, and are never likely to glance again.⁠ ⁠… But this is human nature, and we must not be unkind to The Chase because they were unable to depart from that high standard.</p>
			<p>The papers reported the affair with curious brevity and curiously failed to get at the heart of it. The headlines were all about “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stephen Byrne”⁠—“Poet’s Housemaid”⁠—“Tragedy in an Author’s House”⁠—and so on. It was only at the end of the small paragraphs that you found out there were black suspicions about a Civil Servant, one John Egerton, first-class clerk in the Ministry of Drains. And for The Chase these suspicions were the really startling and enthralling outcome of the inquest, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent and others described it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent described it after dinner in the house of the Petways, where she had dropped in casually for a chat. By a curious chance <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple had also dropped in, so that the fortunate Petways had two eyewitnesses at once. The Whittakers came in in the middle of the story.</p>
			<p>And they all agreed that it was a surprising story⁠—highly surprising as it affected <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton, and also highly unfavourable. Dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne had given his evidence in his usual charming manner, very clear and straightforward and delightful: very anxious to help the Coroner and the jury, in spite of the worry about poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne. “Very pale, he was,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent. “Overstrained,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple.</p>
			<p>And it all depended on this sack, you see. The girl was tied up in the sack. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent gave a little shiver. “Of course, it was all <em>rather</em> horrible, you know, but⁠—” “But you enjoyed it thoroughly,” thought Whittaker.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne said he remembered lending the sack to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton⁠—to collect firewood or something⁠—you know, he’s <em>always</em> poking about in that silly boat of his, picking up sticks.” (The operation as described by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent sounded incredibly puerile and base.) “Then the Coroner asked him if he remembered <em>when</em>. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne said it was about three weeks ago. Then they asked was it before or after the day that this young woman disappeared. You could have heard a pin drop.</p>
			<p>“I was really sorry for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne; I could see he didn’t like it a bit. He didn’t answer for a little, kind of hesitated, then he said it was <em>about</em> the same day⁠—he couldn’t be sure; and that was all they could get out of him⁠—it was <em>about</em> the same day. And you should have <em>seen</em> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton’s face.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent paused to appreciate the effect of her narrative.</p>
			<p>“Then there was the Byrnes’ young woman, Mabel Jones or some such name. She was sent round to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton’s to ask for the sack⁠—one day last week. And <em>she</em> said⁠—what was it she said, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple?”</p>
			<p>“She said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton was ‘short like’ with her, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Ah yes!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent hastened to resume the reins. “He was ‘short like’ and a bit ’uffy with her; and he said he’d lost the sack, picking up wood⁠—lost it in the river.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“And then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton himself was put in the box and he told <em>exactly the same story</em>!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent said these words with a huge ironical emphasis, as if it would have reflected credit on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton had he invented an entirely new story for the purposes of the inquest.</p>
			<p>“He told exactly the same story, and he told it very badly, in my opinion⁠—<em>you</em> know, hesitating and mumbling, as if he was keeping something back⁠—and looking at the floor all the time.”</p>
			<p>“We must remember he’s naturally a very shy man,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple, “and a public inquest, at the best⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but look what he <em>said</em>⁠—The Coroner asked him the same question⁠—when was it he had borrowed the sack⁠—before or after the young woman disappeared. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton said he really didn’t know, because he didn’t know when the young woman had disappeared.⁠ ⁠… As if we didn’t <em>all</em> know, the very next day.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Pardon me,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple, “but I didn’t know myself, not till one day last week⁠—and I live two doors from the Byrnes⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but you’re a <em>man</em>,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent, with a large contempt.</p>
			<p>“So is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent should have been a boxer. She recovered nobly.</p>
			<p>“Anyhow, he didn’t impress me, and he didn’t impress the Coroner. The Coroner kept at him a long time, trying to get it out of him, <em>how</em> he’d lost the sack and so on. Some of the jury asked questions too. They couldn’t understand about the wood-collecting and what he wanted firewood for in the summer, and⁠—Oh yes, <em>I</em> remember. He said it must have slipped off the boat, you see, and been picked up by somebody. Then they asked him what he did with the wood when he picked it up⁠—did he put it in the sack then and there or what? He said no, he just threw it in the bottom of the boat. <em>Then</em> the Coroner said, ‘When did you put it in the sack?’ <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton said, ‘In the garden, of course, to take it indoors.’ And then, you see, the Coroner said, ‘Why on earth did he take the sack out in the boat at <em>all</em>?’ You could have heard a⁠—” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent thought better of it. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton couldn’t answer that⁠—he just looked sheepish, and mumbled something about ‘he forgot!’⁠—forgot, indeed!”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent looked at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple⁠—a triumphant, merciless look.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple murmured reflectively, “Yes⁠—that <em>was</em> odd⁠—very odd.”</p>
			<p>“And as for that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam of his, the old frump! <em>She</em> actually swore that there’d never been a sack in the house! Well, it stands to reason, if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton borrowed that sack to collect wood in, she <em>must</em> have seen it, unless he kept it locked up somewhere⁠—and if he did lock it up somewhere⁠—well, he must have had some funny reason for it.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent shrugged her shoulders expressively.</p>
			<p>“So <em>that</em> didn’t do him any good⁠—especially as she cheeked the Coroner.”</p>
			<p>“And what was the verdict?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, the jury were <em>very</em> quick⁠—I only waited ten minutes or so, you know, just on the chance⁠—and when they came back they said, ‘Wilful murder against somebody unknown’⁠—or something like that. I must say, I was surprised, because the Coroner was <em>very</em> down on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And so were you, I gather,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Whittaker, with forced calm; the Whittakers liked Egerton, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent was slowly bringing them to the boil.</p>
			<p>“Well, if you ask me, I really <em>don’t</em> think he comes out of it very well. Of course, I know the jury didn’t say anything about him, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And that being so, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent, if you will allow me”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple at last cast off his judicial detachment; he spoke with his usual deprecating and kindly air, with a kind of halting fluency that made it seem as if his sentences would never end⁠—“if you will allow me⁠—er, as a lawyer⁠—to ah, venture a little advice⁠—that being so, I think one ought to be careful⁠—not to say anything⁠—which might be⁠—ah, repeated⁠—by perhaps thoughtless people⁠—of course I know we are all friends here⁠—and possibly misinterpreted⁠—as a suggestion⁠—that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton’s part in this affair⁠—though I know, of course, that there were⁠—er⁠—puzzling circumstances⁠—about the evidence⁠—I thought so myself⁠—that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton’s part⁠—was⁠—er⁠—more serious⁠—than one is entitled strictly to deduce⁠—from the verdict⁠—which <em>as</em> you say⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent⁠—did not refer to him directly in any way. You won’t mind my saying so, will you?⁠—but I almost think⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple always talked like that. He was a noble little man, with a thin, peaked, legal countenance and mild eyes that expressed unutterable kindness and impartiality to the whole world. His natural benevolence and a long training in the law had produced in him a complete incapacity for downright censure. His judgments were a tangle of parentheses; and people said that if he were ever raised to the Bench his delivery of the death sentence would generate in the condemned person a positive glow of righteousness and content. He never “thought” or “said”; he only “almost thought” or “ventured to suggest” or “hazarded the opinion, subject of course to⁠—” And this, combined with his habit of parenthesis and periphrasis and polysyllaby (if there is a word like that), made his utterances of almost unendurable duration. He was one of those men during whose anecdotes it is almost impossible to keep awake. Polite people, who knew him well and honoured him for the goodness of his heart and the charity of his life, sometimes rebuked themselves because of this failure, and swore to be better when they met him again. At the beginning of a story (and he had many) they would say to themselves firmly, “I will keep awake during the whole of this anecdote; I will attend to the very end; I will understand it and laugh sincerely about it.” Then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple would ramble off into his genial forest of qualifications and brackets, and the minds of his hearers immediately left him; they thought of their homes, or their work, or the food they were eating, or of the clothes of some other person, or of some story they intended to tell when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple had done; and they came suddenly out of their dreams, to find <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple yet labouring onward to his climax; and they said, with shame and mortification, “I have failed again,” and laughed very heartily at the wrong moment.</p>
			<p>Yet people loved <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple; and if it was impossible sometimes to deduce from what he actually said what it was he actually thought, one was often able to make a good guess on the assumption that he never wittingly said anything cruel or unkind or even mildly censorious to or about anybody.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Whittaker knew this, and he interrupted with:</p>
			<p>“Thank you, Dimple⁠—I thoroughly agree with you⁠—but I don’t think you go nearly far enough.” He stood up, looking very severely at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent. “I think it’s <em>disgusting</em> to say such things about a man⁠—especially about a man like Egerton. I think we ought to get home now, Dorothy. Good night, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Petway.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Petway spluttered feebly, but was unable to utter. The Whittakers departed, trailing clouds of anger.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent assumed an air of injury.</p>
			<p>“Well, my dear, I’m sure I’m sorry if I said anything to upset them, but really⁠—Of course, I know I don’t understand the <em>law</em>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple, and I don’t want to be unfair to any man, but one must use one’s common sense, and what I think is that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton made away with that poor girl, and that’s all about it.”</p>
			<p>She looked defiantly at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple opened his mouth and shut it again. Then he went away.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
