<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
			<p>Lying in bed he made up his mind to go down to Margery the following Tuesday. But Margery, too, had been making up her mind. She wired at lunch time, and arrived herself at tea. She was tired, she said, of living alone in her Paradise. But she did not scold or question or worry him; so glad she was to be at home again with her Stephen. Stephen also was very glad, astonishingly glad, he felt. He greeted her and kissed her with a tender warmth which surprised them both. This sudden homecoming of his wife, of chattering Joan and bubbling Michael and comfortable old Nurse, and all that atmosphere of staid domesticity which they brought with them into the house seemed to set an opportune seal on his new resolutions, on the final renunciation which he had made last night. It was the one thing he wanted, he felt, to confirm him in virtue.</p>
			<p>He took little Joan into the garden to see the rabbits. She was two and a half now, a bright and spirited child, with her mother’s fairness and fragile grace, and something of Stephen’s vitality. She greeted with delighted cries her old friends among the bunnies, Peter and Maud and Henry, and all their endless progeny, little grey bunnies and yellow bunnies and black bunnies and tiny little brown bunnies that were mere scurrying balls of fur, coloured like a chestnut mare. The rabbit Peter and the rabbit Maud ran out of their corners and sniffed at her ankles, their noses twitching, as she stood in the sun. She stroked them and squeezed them and kissed them, and they bore it patiently in the expectation of food. But when they saw that she had no food, they stamped petulantly with their hind legs and ran off. Then she laughed her perfect inimitable laugh, and tried to coax the tiniest bunnies to come to her with a piece of decayed cabbage; and they pattered towards her in a doubtful crescent, their tiny noses twitching with the precise velocity of their parents’ noses, their ears cocked forward in suspicion. When they had eddied back and forth for a little, like playful children defying the sea, they saw that the bait was indeed a rotten one, unworthy of the deed of daring which was asked of them, and they scuttled finally away into corners, where they lay heaving with their eyes slewed back, looking for danger. The rabbit Maud was annoyed by the clatter they made, and, chased them impatiently about the run, nipping them viciously at the back of their necks; and the rabbit Peter, excited beyond bearing by the commotion, pursued the rabbit Maud as she pursued their young. Then they all stopped suddenly to nibble inconsequently at old bits of cabbage, or scratch their bellies, or scrabble vainly on the stone floor, or stamp with venom in the hutches, or lie full length and operate their noses. Little Joan loved them whatever they did, and Stephen, listening and watching while she gurgled and exclaimed, was sensible as he had never been before of the pride and privilege of being a father. The sight of his daughter playing with the young rabbits, young and playful and innocent as they, stirred him to an appropriate and almost mawkish remorse. For the great writer who, by his gifts of selection and restraint, can keep out from his writings all sentimentality and false emotion, cannot by the same powers keep them from his mind. Stephen Byrne, looking at innocence and thinking of his own wickedness, forgot his proportions, forgot the balanced realism which he put into everything he wrote, and swore to himself that by this sight he was converted, that by this revelation of innocence, he, too, would be innocent again.</p>
			<p>So they began again the quiet routine of domestic content, and Margery was very happy, putting out of her mind as an artist’s madness the strange failure of Stephen to join her in the country. In the third week of <time datetime="1919-09">September</time> there were printed in the autumn number of a literary Quarterly “Six Love-Songs,” by Stephen Byrne, which he had sent in hot haste to the editor on the morning of the Greenwich expedition. There was printed above them the dedication “To <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr>,” and Margery as she read them was touched and melted with a great tenderness and pride. She would not speak of them to him, but she looked up, blushing, at the end of them and said only “<em>Stephen!</em>” And Stephen cursed himself in a hot shame for having thought them and written them and sent them to the paper. But since she liked them so well, and appreciated them as Muriel had never done, and since he persuaded himself that at this moment he might have written the same songs to his wife, so tenderly did he think of her now, he slowly came to forget the vicious squalor of their origin; and in time, when literary friends spoke of them and congratulated him (for they made a great stir) the shame had all gone, and he answered with a virtuous and modest pride, as if indeed they had been written to his wife⁠—and so in fact he almost believed.</p>
			<p>All <time datetime="1919-09">September</time> he worked steadily at the new poem. Very soon Margery asked if she might read as much as he had written. And first he hesitated, and then he said she might not.</p>
			<p>Not till that moment did he realize the true character of what he was doing. The idea of the poem was very simple. He had taken the base history of his own life in this amazing summer, and was making of it a romantic and glorious poem. Everything was there⁠—Emily and his cruelty to Emily and the chivalry of John Egerton and his treachery to John, Margery, and Muriel, and his betrayal of both of them, and the second treachery to John in the stealing of Muriel. They were all there, and the deeds were there. But the names they bore were the names of old knights and fine ladies, moving generously through an age of chivalry and gallant ways; and the deeds he had done were invested with so rich a romance by the grace of and imagery and humanity of his verse, and by the gracious atmosphere of knighthood and adventure and forest battles which he wrapped about them, that they were beautiful. They were poetry. Himself in the story was a brave and legendary figure, Gelert by name, and Margery, the Princess, was his fair lady. And he had slain Emily by mischance in a forest encounter with another knight. He had hidden her body in a dark mysterious lake in the heart of the forest; this lake was beautifully described. John, his faithful companion, was present and helped him, and because of the honour in which he held the Princess, he engaged to stay in the forest and do battle with the people of Emily if they should discover the crime, while Gelert rode off on some secret venture of an urgent and noble character. So John stayed, and was grievously wounded. But Gelert rode off to the castle of John’s love and poisoned her mind against John, and wooed her and won her and flung her away when he was tired of her; but she loved him still too well to love any other from that day; and when John came to her she cast him out. More, because he was the companion-at-arms of Gelert, and she would do anything to wound Gelert, she sent word to the people of Emily that it was John indeed who had slain Emily, and they sought him out and slew him. But Gelert went home to his castle and swore great vows in passages of amazing dignity, and was absolved from his sins, and ruled the land for a long time in godly virtue, helping the weak and succouring the oppressed. And so finely was all this presented that at the end of it you felt but a conventional sympathy for the unfortunate John, while Gelert remained in the mind as a mixed, but on the whole a knightly character.</p>
			<p>It was a lunatic excess of self-revelation, and Stephen was afraid of it. Nothing would have persuaded him to modify in any way his artistic purpose, and in his heart he flattered himself that the romantic disguise of his story was strong enough to protect it from the suggestion of reality. It would stand that test, he was sure. Yet he was not sure⁠—not at any rate just now, with the sordid facts still fresh in his mind. Later, no doubt, when the thing was complete, and he could polish and prune it as a whole, he would be able to make himself absolutely safe. But just now, while the work was still shadowy and formless, he shrank from risking the revelations it might convey. To Margery most of all. Also, maybe, he was a little afraid that she would laugh at him.</p>
			<p>And Margery said nothing, but wondered to herself what it might mean.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>John came home in the middle of <time datetime="1919-09">September</time>, and called the same evening at the Tarrants’ house. But he was told after a long wait that they were not at home.</p>
			<p>The next morning, as he walked to the station, he passed in the street a parcel delivery van. On the front of it were the twin red posters of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i>, a weekly organ of the sensational patriotic type. It was a paper which did in fact a great deal of good in championing the cause of the underdog, yet at the same time impressing upon the underdog the highest constitutional principles. But it had to live. And it lived by the weekly promises of sensation which blazed at the public from the red posters all over England, and travelled everywhere on the front of delivery vans and the backs of buses. There was seldom more than a single sensation to each issue. But the very most was made of it by an ingenious contrivance of the editor, who himself arranged the wording of the posters; for each sensation he composed two and sometimes three quite different posters, cunningly devised so that any man who saw all three of them was as likely as not to buy the paper in the confident belief that he was getting for his penny three separate sensations.</p>
			<p>The two posters that John saw ran as follows: one “<b>A Civil Servant’s Name</b>,” and the other “<b>Our Rotten Detectives</b>.” At the station he saw another one specially issued to the West London paper stalls⁠—“<b>Mystery of Hammerton Chase</b>.” And at Charing Cross there was yet another⁠—“<b>Who ought to be Hanged?</b>”</p>
			<p>John had no doubt of what he would find in the paper. He had wondered often at the long quiescence of the Gaunt family. Clearly they had taken their tale to the editor of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i>, and had probably been suitably compensated for their trouble and expense in bringing to the notice of the people’s champion a shameful case of oppression and wrong.</p>
			<p>So John walked on to the station with a strange feeling of lightness in the head and pain in his heart. At Hammersmith there was no copy of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i> to be had; at Charing Cross he bought two. The week’s sensation was dealt with in a double-page article by the editor, diabolically clever. It set out at length the sparse facts of “The Hammerton Mystery” as revealed at the inquest, with obsequious references to “the genius of Stephen Byrne, the poet and prophet of Younger England”; and it contained some scathing comments on “the crass ineptitude of our detective organization.” But it attacked no person, it imputed nothing. The sole concern of the editor was that “months have passed and a hideous crime is yet unpunished. This poor girl went forth from her father and mother, and the young man who had promised to share her life; she went out into the world, innocent and fresh, to help her family in the battle of life with the few poor shillings she could earn by menial services in a strange house. It was not her fault that she was attractive to a certain type of man; but that attraction was no doubt her undoing. She took the fancy of some amorous profligate; she resisted his unknightly attentions; she was done to death. Her body was consigned in circumstances of the foulest indignity to a filthy grave in the river ooze.</p>
			<p>“We are entitled to ask⁠—What are the police doing? The matter has faded now from the public memory⁠—has it faded from theirs? It is certain that it has not faded in the loyal hearts of the Gaunt family. At the time of the inquest the public were preoccupied with national events of the first importance, and the murder did not excite the attention it deserved. We have only too good reason to believe that our Criminal Investigation mandarins, supine as ever until they are goaded to activity by the spur of popular opinion, are taking advantage of that circumstance to allow this piece of blackguardly wickedness to sink forever into oblivion. We do not intend that it should sink into oblivion, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>”</p>
			<p>But in the tail of the article lay the personal sting, cleverly concealed.</p>
			<p>“But there is another aspect of this vile affair which we are compelled to notice. While the family of the murdered girl are nursing silently their broken hearts; while our inspectors and chief inspectors and criminal investigators are enjoying their comfortable salaries, there is a young man in Hammerton, a public servant of high character and irreproachable antecedents, over whom a black cloud of suspicion is hanging in connection with this crime. We cannot pretend that his evidence at the inquest was wholly satisfactory either in substance or in manner; it was shiftily given, and in the mind of any men less incompetent than the local coroner and the local dunderheads who composed the jury, would have raised questions of fundamental importance. But we are confident that John Egerton is innocent; and we say that it is a reproach to the whole system of British justice that he should still be an object of ignorant suspicion owing to the failure of the police-force to hound down the villain responsible for the crime.</p>
			<p>“The fair name of a good citizen is at stake. It must be cleared.”</p>
			<p>At the office there were whisperings and curious looks; and John’s chiefs conferred in dismay on a position of delicacy that was unexampled in their official experience.</p>
			<p>John went home early, with his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i>’s crumpled in his pocket. And there he found the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter Tarrant striding about impatiently with a copy open on the table before him. His head moved about like a great bat just under the low roof; his jolly red face was as full of anger as it could ever be.</p>
			<p>“Look here, John,” he roared, “what are you going to do about this⁠—this <strong>Muck</strong>?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing.”</p>
			<p>In truth he had thought little of what he was going to do; he had been too angry and bewildered and ashamed. Only he had sworn vaguely to himself that whatever happened he would stand by his old determination to keep this business from Margery. And, now that the question was put to him, the best way of doing that was clearly to do nothing. He began to think of reasons for doing nothing.</p>
			<p>The <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter thundered again, “<em>Nothing?</em> But you <em>must</em>⁠—you must do⁠—something.” He stuttered with impotent rage and brought his fist down on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i> with a titanic force, so that the table jumped and the wedgwood plate clattered on the dresser. “You can’t sit down under this sort of thing⁠—you must bring an action⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Can’t afford it; it would cost me a thousand if I won⁠—and five thousand if⁠—if I lost.”</p>
			<p>“If you <em>lost</em>!” The <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter looked at him in wonder. John tried to look him straight in the face, but his glance wavered in the shy distress of an innocent man who suspects the beginnings of doubt in a friend’s mind.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—you know what a Law Court is⁠—anything may happen⁠—and I should never make a good show in the witness box, if I stood there forever.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t care⁠—you can’t sit down under it. You’ll lose your job, won’t you⁠—for one thing?”</p>
			<p>“No⁠—I don’t know⁠—I can’t help it if I do.”</p>
			<p>“Well, if you don’t lose that you’ll lose Muriel.” The <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter lowered his voice. “Look here, I want you two to fix things up. I’ve just been to see her⁠—she looks unhappy⁠—she’s lonely, I believe, with that damned old mother of hers. But you can’t expect her to marry you with this sort of thing going about uncontradicted.”</p>
			<p>And at that John wavered. But he thought of Margery and his knightly vow, and he thought of the witness box; of himself stammering and shifting hour after hour in that box; of pictures in the Press; of columns in the Press; of day after day of public wretchedness⁠—the inquest over again infinitely enlarged. And he thought of the open, perhaps inevitable, ignominy of losing a libel action. And he was sure that he was right.</p>
			<p>They argued about this for a long time, and the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter yielded at last.</p>
			<p>But he bellowed then, “Well, you must write them a letter at once. Sit down now, and I’ll dictate it. Sit down, will you? By God, it makes me sweat, this!”</p>
			<p>John sat down meekly and wrote to the editor of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i>, as the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter commanded. The <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter dictated in round tones of a man practising a speech:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">“ ‘Dear Sir:</p>
				<p>“ ‘I have seen your infamous article. It is a cruel and disgusting libel. I wish to state publicly that I had nothing to do with the death of Emily Gaunt; that so far as I know no suspicion does rest upon me here or elsewhere; and that, if indeed there is suspicion, it is not in the minds of anyone whose opinion I value, and I can therefore ignore it. In any case I should prefer to do without your dirty assistance.’ ”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Can’t say ‘dirty’⁠—can we?” said John.</p>
			<p>“Why not? They <em>are</em> dirt⁠—filth⁠—muck! Well, then⁠—put ‘dishonouring’⁠—‘your dishonouring assistance.’ Go on:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“ ‘I am not a rich man, and I cannot afford to bring an action for libel against you. A successful suit would cost me far more money and trouble than I should like to waste upon it. You, on the other hand, could easily afford to lose and would probably be actually benefited by a substantial increase in your circulation.</p>
				<p>“ ‘I must ask you to print this letter in your next issue and insist also on an unqualified apology for your use of my name.</p>
				<p>“ ‘I am sending this letter to the local Press.’ ”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The editor of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i> did not print this letter, as the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter had fondly imagined he would, but he referred in his second article, which was similar to the first, only more outspoken, to “the receipt of an abusive letter from the suspected person.”</p>
			<p>Slowly that week a copy of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i> found its way into every house in The Chase; and the article was read and discussed and argued about, and the whole controversy of <time datetime="1919-05">May</time>, which had been almost forgotten, sprang into life again. And the following week the local papers were bought and borrowed and devoured, and John’s spirited and courageous letter was admired and laughed at and condemned. The Chase fell again into factions, though now the Whittaker (pro-John) faction was the stronger. For nobody liked <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i>, though it was always exciting to read when there was some special excuse for bringing it into the house. Besides, the honour of The Chase was now at stake.</p>
			<p>John and the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Peter had reckoned without the generosity and communal feeling of the people of The Chase. They were never so happy as when they had some communal enterprise on foot, a communal kitchen, or a communal crèche or a communal lawsuit, some joint original venture which offered reasonable opportunities for friendly argument and committee meetings and small subscriptions. This spirit had of course unlimited scope during the war, and perhaps it was the communal Emergency Food-Kitchen that had been its most ambitious and perfect expression. But it lived on vigorously after the war. Several of the busiest and earliest workers among the men shared a communal taxi into town every day. There was a communal governess, and one or two semi-communal boats. There was also a kind of communal Housing Council, which met whenever a house in The Chase was to be let or sold, and exerted pressure on the outgoing tenant as to his choice of a successor. Outside friends of The Chase who desired and were desired to come into residence were placed upon a roster by the Housing Council, and when the Council’s edict had once gone forth, the outgoing tenant was expected at all costs to see that the chosen person was enabled to succeed him, and if he did not, or if he allowed the owner of the house to enter into some secret arrangement with an outsider, unknown and unapproved by the Council, it was a sin against the solidarity of The Chase.</p>
			<p>And there had already been a communal lawsuit, that great case of <i epub:type="se:name.legal-case">Stimpson and Others versus The Quick Boat Company</i>⁠—an action for nuisance brought by the entire Chase, because of the endless and intolerable noise and smell of the defendant company’s motorboats, which they manufactured half a mile up the river and exercised all day snorting and phutting and dashing about with loud and startling reports in the narrow reach between the Island and The Chase.</p>
			<p>Nine gallant champions had stood forward with Stimpson for freedom and The Chase. But all The Chase had attended the preliminary meetings; all The Chase had subscribed; all The Chase and all their wives had given evidence in Court; and before this unbroken, or almost unbroken, front (for there were a few black sheep) the Quick Boat Company had gone down heavily. Judgment for the plaintiffs had been given in the early spring.</p>
			<p>So that when it was widely understood that for lack of money John Egerton, a member of The Chase, was unable to defend himself from a scurrilous libel in a vulgar paper, the deepest instincts of the neighbourhood were aroused. A small informal Committee met at once at the Whittakers’ house⁠—Whittaker and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple (for legal advice) and Andrews and Tatham and Henry Stimpson. Stephen Byrne was asked to come, but had an engagement.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple’s advice was simple. He said that subject to certain reservations⁠—as to which he would not bother the Committee, since they related rather to the incalculable niceties of the law, and lawyers, as they knew, were always on the nice side (laughter⁠—but not much)⁠—and assuming that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton won his case, as to which he would express no opinion, though as a man he might venture to say that he knew of no one in The Chase⁠—he had almost said no one in London⁠—of whom it would be more unfair⁠—he would not put it stronger than that, for he liked to assume that even a paper such as <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i> was sincere and honest at heart⁠—to make the kind of suggestion which he knew and they all knew had been made in that paper, about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton⁠—a quiet, God-fearing, honest citizen⁠—but they all knew him as well as he did, so he would say no more about that⁠—subject then to what he had said first and assuming what he had just said⁠—and bearing in mind the proverbial⁠—he thought he might say proverbial (Dickens, after all, was almost a proverb) uncertainties and surprises of his own profession, he thought they would not be wildly optimistic or unduly despondent⁠—and for himself he wanted to be neither⁠—if they estimated the costs of the action at a thousand pounds, but of course⁠—</p>
			<p>Waking up at the word “pounds”⁠—the kind of word for which they had been subconsciously waiting⁠—the Committee began the process of unravelling which was always necessary after one of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple’s discourses. And their conclusion was that it was up to The Chase to subscribe as much of the money as possible, as much at any rate as would enable John Egerton to issue a writ without the risk of financial ruin.</p>
			<p>Henry Stimpson was naturally deputed to collect the money. Stimpson was an indefatigable man, a laborious Civil Servant who worked from <time datetime="10:00">10</time> till <time datetime="19:30">7:30</time> every day (and took his lunch at the office), yet was not only ready but pleased to spend his evenings and his weekends, canvassing for subscriptions, writing whips for meetings, or working out elaborate calculations of the amount due to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose in money and kind on her resigning from the communal kitchen after paying the full subscription and depositing a ham in the Committee’s charge which had been cooked by mistake and sent to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent. He genuinely enjoyed this kind of task, and he did it very, very well.</p>
			<p>Henry Stimpson duly waited on the Byrnes and explained the position. Stephen Byrne had read the articles in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i>, and Margery had read them. And a gloom had fallen upon Stephen, for which Margery was unable wholly to account as a symptom of solicitude for his friend’s troubles⁠—especially as they never seemed to see each other nowadays. To her knowledge they had not met at all since the summer holidays.</p>
			<p>Nor had they. They avoided each other. This resurrection of the Emily affair, these articles and the new publicity, and now on top of that the prospect of a libel action, was to Stephen like a slap in the face. He had almost forgotten his old anxieties in the absorption of work and the soothing atmosphere of his new resolutions. But he would not go to John; he had been lucky before; he might be lucky again; he would wait. Old John might be trusted to do nothing precipitate.</p>
			<p>So he promised to subscribe to the fund for the defence of John Egerton’s good name, and Stimpson went away. The money was to be collected by that day week, and on the following Thursday there would be a general meeting to consider a plan of campaign. Stimpson’s eyes as he spoke of “a general meeting” were full of quiet joy.</p>
			<p>And Stephen went on with his work⁠—very slowly now, but he went on. The poem was nearly finished; he had only to polish it a little. But he sat now for long minutes glowering and frowning over his paper, staring out of the window, staring at nothing. Margery, watching him, wondered yet more what work he was at, and what was the secret of this gloom. She began to think that the two things might be connected; he might be attempting some impossible task; he might be overworked and stale. This had happened before. But in his worst hours of artistic depression he had never looked so black as sometimes she saw him now. And she noticed that he tried to conceal this mood from her; he would manufacture a smile if he caught her watching him. And that, too, was unusual.</p>
			<p>Then one evening when she went to her table for some small thing she saw there the unmistakable manuscript of this new work lying in an irregular heap on the blotter. Her eyes were caught by the title⁠—“The Death in the Wood”⁠—written in large capitals at the head; and almost without thinking she read the first line. And she read the few following lines. Then, urged on by an uncontrollable curiosity and excitement, she read on. She sat down at the table and read, threading a slow way through a maze of alterations and erasions, and jumbles of words enclosed in circles on the margin or at the bottom or at the top and wafted with arrows and squiggly lines into their intended positions. But she understood the strange language of creative manuscript, and she read through the whole of the first section⁠—Gelert riding through the forest, the battle in the forest, and the death of the maiden. And as she read she was deeply moved. She forgot the problem of Stephen’s gloom in her admiration and affectionate pride.</p>
			<p>At the end of it Gelert stood sorrowing over the body and made a speech of intense dignity and poetic feeling. And at that point she heard the voice of Stephen at the front door, and started away, remembering suddenly that this reading was a breach of confidence. But why⁠—why was she not allowed to see it?</p>
			<p>Yet that, after all, was a small thing; and she went to bed very happy, dreaming such golden dreams of the success of the poem as she might have dreamed if she had written it herself.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
