<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
			<p>John Egerton came home very weary that evening; and all the way home things went wrong as they had gone wrong on a certain evening in <time datetime="1919-06">June</time> when he had come home tired to find the Byrnes‚Äô maid on the doorstep, and told the first lie about the sack. Tonight again the trains went wrong, and they were stuffy and packed, difficult to enter and difficult to leave and abominable to be in. It was one of the exceptionally hateful journeys which men remember as they remember battles. It was of a piece with that night in <time datetime="1919-06">June</time>, and John thought of them together as he walked home, hot and jumpy with irritation. Nothing had gone right since that night‚ÅÝ‚Äînothing. He had lost his love, and his good name, and his peace of mind‚ÅÝ‚Äîand his best friend. He had had faith in Stephen then; he had admired and loved‚ÅÝ‚Äîhad almost idolized him. Tonight he felt that he hated Stephen. Not a word from him‚ÅÝ‚Äînot one word of encouragement or gratitude in all this filthy business of the articles. Not that he wanted Stephen to <em>do</em> anything‚ÅÝ‚Äîoh no! He had made his vow and he would stick to it. But it did hurt that Stephen should take this sacrifice so much as a matter of course, should do nothing to help him in this new storm of suspicion. He had been a good friend once‚ÅÝ‚Äîa jolly, companionable friend, openhearted and full of laughter‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe best friend a lonely bachelor could have. Well, it was done with now. He had lost that as he had lost everything else. And it had all begun with that lie. Perhaps it was a judgment. Perhaps there was never a virtuous lie.</p>
			<p>He had bought at Charing Cross the <time datetime="1919-10">October</time> number of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Argus</i>, because he had seen on the cover the name of Stephen Byrne, and he read everything that Stephen wrote. After dinner he sat down and read ‚ÄúThe Death in the Wood.‚Äù And at first he read, as Margery had read, only with admiration, though it was now a jealous, almost reluctant admiration. He thought, ‚ÄúHow can a mean swine like Stephen create such glorious high-minded stuff?‚Äù It was unnatural, wrong.</p>
			<p>While he was reading the bell rang. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝBantam came in. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs them Gaunts,‚Äù she whispered. The Gaunt family had not been near him for months, and now they had come to pluck the certain fruit of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">I Say</i> articles. They stood in a defiant cluster in the tiny hall. John, for once, fortified and embittered by the exasperations of the Underground, allowed himself to be violently angry. He took a stick from the rack and shouted at them, ‚ÄúGet out of my house‚ÅÝ‚Äîor I‚Äôll‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôll throw you out!‚Äù A little to his surprise they did go out, and he went back to ‚ÄúThe Death in the Wood,‚Äù pleasantly relieved by his self-assertion and anger.</p>
			<p>He read on through the burial in the lake, and the finding of the maiden, and the battle at the lake where the faithful Tristram fought and was wounded. Then he came to the wooing in the castle, the false wooing by Gelert of Tristram‚Äôs lady, the lovely Isobel. And here the soft heart of John melted within him; for the picture of Isobel which Stephen had drawn was so like the picture of Muriel that was ever in his own mind, a fair and gracious and relenting lady; and the hot words of Gelert were such words as he would have uttered and had dreamed himself uttering to Muriel Tarrant. But Muriel Tarrant had done with him, it seemed; she would hardly nod at him across the road; he had not spoken to her alone since that miserable dance. And this poetry of Stephen Byrne‚Äôs was the perfect expression of his faithful devotion, and made him almost weep with sentimental regret.</p>
			<p>He read these passages several times. Then he went on to the poisoning by Gelert of Isobel‚Äôs mind against her old lover, and his conquest of her, and his cruel desertion of her. And somewhere among those terrible lines the thought came to him as it had come to Margery, with a red-hot excruciating stab‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat this story was a true story. And he looked back then, as Margery had looked, at the first pages of the poem and at the memory of those dreadful months in the new light of his suspicions. He remembered the dance, and Muriel‚Äôs face at the dance; how kind at the beginning of it, how cold and cruel at the end‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhen she had danced many times with Stephen. He remembered how he had met her in <time datetime="1919-09">September</time> in the street; and how in her sidelong look there had been not only that coldness, but also a certain shame. Could it be?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>Once, he was sure, she had liked him a little‚ÅÝ‚Äîin the end he could have won her; she would have relieved him of this loneliness‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis loneliness in an empty house with the hateful whining at the windows; but something devilish and unknown had got in the way.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And if it was Stephen, and Stephen‚Äôs lies.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ God! He would go to Muriel, he would go to Stephen; he would have it out of them, he would go now‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			<p>And as he paced up and down the room, working himself into a fever of rage, that terrible cry came out of the night, and he rushed out into the garden. Over the wall he scrambled to Margery, and heard her incoherent appeals; then on to Stephen‚Äôs steps and down into Stephen‚Äôs motorboat. ‚ÄúThe oars,‚Äù he shouted‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúthe oars!‚Äù and Margery pushed them, trembling, over the wall. He rowed out wildly towards the Island, missing the water and splashing emptily in his haste. He turned round and there was nothing to be seen, no other boat, no bobbing head‚ÅÝ‚Äînothing, nothing but the gleam and shadow of the tumbled water. He rowed round laboriously in a wide circle for many minutes, peering, shouting, damp with spindrift and the sweat of rowing, though his hands were frozen and numb upon the oars. The boat was a hideous weight for rowing in the fierce wind, and when he could see nothing anywhere, he started the engine‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith merciful ease‚ÅÝ‚Äîand steered up past the Island, since anything that was in the water must move up with the tide at last. The spray shot over the bows and blinded him. The boat steered drunkenly as he wiped his eyes and peered out at the water, and shouted weakly at the wind.</p>
			<p>He came out past the Island into the open, and there he saw the dinghy, fifty yards ahead, a dark blot, dancing aimlessly sideways over the short waves. Anyhow, he would pick up the dinghy‚ÅÝ‚Äîit might be useful.</p>
			<p>But when he came up with the dinghy he saw that there was something in it, something that was like the carved figures that may be seen brooding over tombs, with curved back and head drooping over clasped knees, a figure of utter dejection. But now and then it moved and paddled feebly in the water with one hand.</p>
			<p>John called, with an incredulous question in his voice, ‚ÄúStephen? Stephen? Is that you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>And it was Stephen, brooding bitterly over the shame of his last cowardice, and exhausted with the long struggle he had made for life. For the cold clutch of the water had woken up the love of life, and he had swum in a scrambling terror after the boat, and climbed with infinite difficulty back into the oarless boat. He was sodden and cold, and sick with humiliation. And John Egerton of all people must come and find him. So he turned his head and said with a great bitterness, ‚ÄúO God! It‚Äôs <em>you</em>, is it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>When John saw that miserable figure, there began to take hold of him that old and fatal softness of heart; he felt very pitiful, and he said gently, ‚ÄúGet in, Stephen.‚Äù And Stephen crawled over into the other boat, the water streaming from him; and they sat together on the wide seat in front of the engine as they had sat so often before.</p>
			<p>Then John said, ‚ÄúWhat happened? We thought you‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>Stephen growled, ‚ÄúSo I did‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I funked it.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I was drunk.‚Äù Then he burst out, ‚ÄúBut, damn it, it‚Äôs nothing to do with you.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Turn her round‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôm soaked.‚Äù</p>
			<p>And then, at the sullen bitterness of his voice and his words, John Egerton remembered his rage, he remembered the black grievance and suspicion he had against this man. And though the impulse to pity and forbearance struggled still within him, he fought it down. He would be firm for once. The boats swung sideways in the wind, and drifted, rolling, round the bend.</p>
			<p>He put his hand behind him on the starting-handle of the engine, as he said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚Äôre not going back yet, Stephen. I want to ask you something. What have you‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat have you been‚ÅÝ‚Äîbeen doing to Muriel? What have you said to her‚ÅÝ‚Äîabout me, and about‚ÅÝ‚Äî?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, <em>hell</em>, John! I‚Äôm frozen, I can‚Äôt sit jawing here. Start the boat and let me get home‚ÅÝ‚Äîor let <em>me</em>, damn you!‚Äù And he too seized the handle, gripping John‚Äôs hand; and they sat there, crouching absurdly over the back of the seat, glowering at each other in the noisy wind.</p>
			<p>And John nearly gave way; he felt that he was being unreasonable, perhaps foolish‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis was no place for talk. But he was very angry and resentful again, and he said he would be firm for once. And so do the tragedies of life have their birth.</p>
			<p>He shouted, ‚ÄúWe‚Äôre not going back till you‚Äôve told me the truth‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚Äôve been telling lies to Muriel‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚Äôve made love to her. God knows what you‚Äôve done‚ÅÝ‚Äîand you‚Äôve got to tell me‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>now</em>!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<em>Will</em> you let go of this handle, damn you? It‚Äôs <em>my</em> boat!‚Äù</p>
			<p>John held on. Then Stephen gave a great heave with his body, so that John nearly went overboard; but his grip held firm. So they fought with their bodies for a minute, heaving and panting and muttering low curses, and clutching still the disputed handle. The boat rocked dangerously, and the forgotten dinghy drifted away. They were beyond the houses now, and beyond the brewery, moving slowly past the flat and desolate meadows. There was no one to see them. But no one could have seen them. The rain was coming and it was really dark now; a huge black cloud had rolled up out of the west and blotted out the last stars. John looked once towards the meadows, but he could not see the bank‚ÅÝ‚Äîonly an endless flickering blackness. They were alone out there in the howling dark, and they knew that they were alone. And at last, when nothing came of this insane struggle, Stephen suddenly took his hand from the handle and struck John a fierce blow on the side of the head; and John staggered, but gripped him immediately by the throat with his left hand, clinging still to the handle with his right. So they sat for a moment, Stephen clutching at the hand at his throat, and black hatred in the hearts of both of them, and their eyes fixed in a staring fury. Stephen was the stronger man, and with a supreme effort he tore away the hand from his throat. He dived forward over the thwart and seized one of the oars. Then he turned to attack, standing up in a crouching posture. But John Egerton had seen red at last, and he dimly knew that Stephen was yet more mad with fury than himself. He had no weapon except the starting-handle in his hand, but as Stephen turned, he whipped this from its place and sprang forward; he struck out fiercely with the iron handle. Stephen lifted his oar to guard himself, and the handle struck it with great force, with a heavy thud upon the wood. Stephen swayed a little, but he was unhurt, and the handle fell from John‚Äôs hands into the boat. Then Stephen lifted his oar again and swung it in a wide circle, like a great sword, a vicious, terrible blow. But John ducked, and it swept over his head. And while Stephen was yet recovering himself, he sprang up, and he sprang at Stephen, and he lunged at him with his fist. John Egerton was no boxer, but fate was with him in that fight, and all the hoarded resentment of the summer was behind that blow. It caught Stephen on the jaw as he raised his head. It caught him on the point of the jaw with the uncanny completeness of precision and force which no man can endure who is struck in that place. His head went up, and the oar dropped from his hands. For a moment he tottered, and then he fell, without a word, without a cry, forward and sideways, into the water. And John himself fell forward over the thwart, and lay panting in the rolling boat. When he looked out at last, he could see nothing, nothing but the empty water, and the empty meadows, and, far off, the lights of Barnes.</p>
			<p>He searched the water for a long time, and after a little he found the oar, which Stephen had dropped; but he found nothing else. And at last he was sure that Stephen was dead. He went home slowly against the tide; and Margery was waiting in the garden, looking out into the wind. He told her simply that he could not find Stephen; and this time he lied easily.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>That night she did not show him the paper which she had found in the dining-room. But in the morning she gave it to him, and John tore it carefully into small pieces and threw them on the fire. And this he did without the sense or the circumstance of drama. For John Egerton was no artist. But he was a good man.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
