<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
			<p>Stephen Michael Hilary Byrne had given his mother the maximum of trouble that <time datetime="1919-05-30">Friday</time> evening; and on <time datetime="1919-06-01">Sunday</time> morning she was still too feeble and ill to appreciate his beauty. Old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Browning was less cheerful than Stephen had ever seen him. He shook his head almost grimly as he squeezed his square frame into his diminutive car.</p>
			<p>Stephen went back disconsolately into the warm garden. He had seen Margery for a moment, and she had whispered weakly, “You go out in your boat, my dear,” and then something about “a lovely morning⁠ ⁠… I’m all right.” Also he had seen his son and tried hard to imagine that he was two years old, a legitimate object for enthusiasm. He had helped Joan to feed her rabbits and swept the garden and tidied things in the summerhouse. But he had done all these things with an anxious eye on the full and falling river. And already he had had several shocks.</p>
			<p>Now he felt that he could not leave the river, not at least while the tide was up and there was all this muddle of flotsam quivering past. Usually, on Sunday mornings he sat in his sunny window writing, with the birds bickering in the creeper outside and the lazy sounds of Sunday morning floating up from the river. Sunday morning along The Chase was an irreligious but peaceful occasion. The people of The Chase strolled luxuriously in the hot sun from door to door, watching their neighbours’ children depart with fussy pomp upon their walks. Babies slept interminably in huge prams under the trees. The old houses looked very gracious and friendly with the wisteria and ivy and countless kinds of green things scrambling about the rickety balconies and wandering through the open windows. Strangers walked in quiet couples along the path and admired the red roofs and the quaint brass knockers on the doors and the nice old names of the houses and the nice old ladies purring sleepily inside. Out on the river the owners of the anchored boats prepared them happily for action, setting sails and oiling engines and hauling laboriously at anchors. Two white cutters moved delicately about in the almost imperceptible breeze. Strenuous eights and fours and pairs went rhythmically up and down. The hoarse adjurations of their trainers came over the water with startling clearness. Single scullers, contemptuously independent, shot by like large water-beetles in slim skiffs. On the far towpath the idle people streamed blissfully along, marvelling at the gratuitous exertions of the oarsmen. Down the river there was a multitude of small boys bathing from a raft, with much splashing and shrill cries. Their bodies shone like polished metal in the distance. There were no tugs on Sundays, but at intervals a river-steamer plodded up towards Kew, a congested muddle of straw hats and blouses. Sometimes a piano tinkled in the stern, sounding almost beautiful across the water.</p>
			<p>On all these vulgar and suburban and irreligious people the June sun looked down with a great kindness and warmth; and they were happy. And Stephen, as a rule, was happy at Hammersmith on Sunday mornings. He thought with repugnance of Sunday morning in Kensington, of stiff clothes in the High Street and the shuttered faces of large drapery stores; he thought with pity even of the promenaders in Hyde Park, unable to see the trees for the people, unable to look at the sky because of their collars. He loved the air and openness and pleasant vulgar variety of Sunday morning at Hammersmith. Here at least it was a day of naturalness and rest. On any other Sunday, if the tide served, he would have slipped out after breakfast in his boat to gather firewood for the winter. Just now there was a wealth of driftwood in the river, swept off wharves by the spring tides or flung away by bargees⁠—wedges and small logs and boxwood and beams and huge stakes, and delicious planks covered with tar. Anyone who had a boat went wood-hunting on the river.</p>
			<p>He had a mind to go now. But it would look so odd, with his wife dangerously ill indoors, though she herself had told him to do it. But then that was like her. He must not go unless he had to⁠—unless he saw something.⁠ ⁠… All <time datetime="1919-05-31">Saturday</time> while the tide was up he had furtively watched from window or garden, and seen nothing. Perhaps he had made a mistake on <time datetime="1919-05-30">Friday</time>.</p>
			<p>No. He had made no mistake. Emily Gaunt was drifting somewhere in this damnably public river. Unless she was already found, already lying in a mortuary. And if she was⁠—</p>
			<p>Stephen looked enviously at the happy crowds on the towpath, on the steamers, in the boats. A heavy sculling-boat passed close to the wall. It seemed almost to overflow with young men and women. All of them gazed curiously at him, muttering comments on his appearance. Their easy laughter annoyed him. He went indoors.</p>
			<p>He sat down automatically at his table in the window, and took out of a pigeonhole a crumpled bundle of scribbled paper. It was the beginning of a long poem. He had begun it⁠—when? Two⁠—three weeks ago. Before Emily. He read through what he had written, and thought it bad⁠—weak, flabby, uneven stuff⁠—as it stood. But it was a good idea, and he could do it justice, he was sure, if he persevered. But not now. Just now he was incapable. Since Emily’s night he had not written a line of poetry; he had only tried once. Not because of his conscience⁠—it was the anxiety, the worry. He could not concentrate.</p>
			<p>A bell rang below, and he wondered if it was John Egerton. There was the sound of conversation in the hall, Cook’s voice and the voice of a man, powerful and low. Then Cook lumbered up the stairs.</p>
			<p>“If you please, sir, there’s a man brought the sack back what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton took, as used to ’ang in the scullery, and ’e’d like to see you.”</p>
			<p>Stephen braced himself and went down. The man in the hall was an obvious detective⁠—square built and solid, with hard grey eyes and a dark walrus moustache, a bowler hat in his hand. In the other he held the end of a yellow sack, muddy in patches and discoloured.</p>
			<p>“Sorry to trouble you, sir, but can you tell me anything about this sack? I’m a police officer,” he added unnecessarily.</p>
			<p>Stephen felt extraordinarily cool.</p>
			<p>He said, “Can’t say, Inspector. Sacks are very much alike. We had one in the scullery once, but⁠—” He had the sack in his hands now, looking for the label.</p>
			<p>“And what happened to <em>your</em> sack, sir?” said the man smoothly.</p>
			<p>“We lent it to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton, and⁠—<em>Hullo!</em> where did you find <em>this</em>, Inspector? It is ours!” And he held it out for the other to see the blurred lines of the label stitched inside the mouth of the sack. The name of Stephen Byrne, The House by the River, <abbr epub:type="z3998:place">W</abbr> 6, was still legible.</p>
			<p>“Very curious, sir,” said the man, looking hard at Stephen. “Do you remember when you lent it to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton?”</p>
			<p>Stephen made a rapid calculation. The exact period was seventeen days.</p>
			<p>He said, “When was it, Cook? About three weeks ago, wasn’t it?”</p>
			<p>“Couldn’t say, sir, I’m sure. All I knows is it went one day, and the other day we asked for it back from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton when the man came about the bottles, and he said⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton said, that is⁠—as he was sorry he’d lost it picking up wood, or so Mabel said, and it was Mabel as went round for it.”</p>
			<p>Stephen was feeling cooler and cooler. It was all amazingly easy.</p>
			<p>He said, “That’s right, Cook; I remember now. I gave it to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton myself one evening; he was going out to get wood.” Then, with a tone of cheerful finality as one who puts an end to a tedious conversation with an inferior, “Well, I’m sure we’re much obliged to you, Inspector, for bringing it back. Where⁠—”</p>
			<p>“If you don’t mind, sir, I’d like to keep it a little longer. Those are my orders, sir⁠—there’s a little matter we’re clearing up just now⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Just so. Certainly, Inspector. As long as you like.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, sir. And as I take it, sir, none of your household has seen anything of this article since you lent it to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton?”</p>
			<p>“As far as I know, no one⁠—I certainly haven’t seen it myself. In fact, I was looking for it only the other day.”</p>
			<p>The Inspector thought obviously for a moment, and obviously decided to say no more. “Well, that’s all, sir, and thank you.”</p>
			<p>Stephen bowed him affably out of the door. “Of course, if it’s anything <em>important</em>, I should look in and see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton⁠—he’s only next door.”</p>
			<p>“No, sir, it’s of no consequence. I’ll be off now.”</p>
			<p>The man departed, with many smiles, and “sirs,” and “Thank you’s,” and Stephen watched him round the corner.</p>
			<p>Then he went into the garden, full of a curious relief, almost of exultation. He could delight at last in the sun and the boats and the happy, irresponsible people. He, too, could look at the beloved river without any urgent anxiety of what it might carry into his view. The worst was over; the doubts were done with. Emily was found, and there was an end to it. And he had diddled the policeman. How cleverly, how gloriously he had diddled the policeman. Perfect frankness and easiness and calm⁠—a gracious manner and a good lie⁠—they had worked perfectly. He had never hoped for anything so easy. Almost without intention, certainly without plan, as if inspired he had uttered those tremendous lies about John. And, of course, he could hardly have said anything else. Cook had given John away already; one must be consistent. Poor old John! He must see John⁠—talk to him⁠—warn him⁠—no, diddle him. He could manage John all right.</p>
			<p>He went down the steps into his tiny dinghy⁠—a minute, fragile, flat-bottomed affair, just large enough and strong enough for a single man. It flitted lightly on the surface like one of those cumbrous-looking waterflies which move suddenly on the quiet surface of ponds with a startling velocity. He called it <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.boat">The Water Beetle</i>.</p>
			<p>With a few strokes Stephen shot out into the lovely sun, and drifted a little, faintly stirring the oars as they rested flatly on the golden water with a movement which was almost a caress. It was very delightful out there, very soothing and warm. It was inspiring, too. Stephen thought suddenly of the long poem. He must have a go at that⁠—now that things were better, now that his mind was easier.</p>
			<p>Then he saw John walk down to the end of his garden, smoking comfortably the unique and wonderful Sunday morning pipe. He rowed back immediately to the wall, framing smooth explanatory phrases in his head. John, he saw, was gazing with a strained look through his glasses at a muddle of wreckage drifting down from the Island.</p>
			<p>“You needn’t worry, John,” he said; “it’s all over⁠—it’s⁠—it’s <em>found</em>.⁠ ⁠… Come down the steps.”</p>
			<p>John came down and squatted at the foot of the steps, saying nothing. Stephen tied up the boat, but did not get out of it.</p>
			<p>“A man’s been here this morning⁠—a policeman⁠—with the sack⁠ ⁠… he wanted to know if we knew anything about it.⁠ ⁠… Cook saw him first, and let out that it was ours⁠—said we’d lent it to you⁠—silly fool⁠ ⁠… about three weeks back⁠ ⁠… when I saw him it was too late to say anything else.⁠ ⁠…” He stopped and looked up. Surely John was going to say something.</p>
			<p>John looked steadily at him and said nothing.</p>
			<p>“She said Mabel went round and asked you for it, and you said⁠—what <em>did</em> you say, John?”</p>
			<p>John looked out across the river and thought. Then he said in a faraway voice:</p>
			<p>“I said I’d taken it out to pick up wood⁠—and lost it. Overboard⁠ ⁠… I had to say something.”</p>
			<p>“Hell!” Stephen hoped that this exclamation had an authentic note of perplexity and distress. He was conscious of neither, only of a singular clearness and contentment.</p>
			<p>“Well, what are we going to do now?”</p>
			<p>There was no answer.</p>
			<p>“Margery’s very bad this morning,” he went on, with seeming irrelevance. “We’re very worried. The doctor⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>John interrupted suddenly, “What <em>can</em> we do? What will the police do next? Will they come and see me?” He had a sudden appalling vision of himself in a stammering, degrading interview with a detective.</p>
			<p>“No, John, they won’t bother you.⁠ ⁠… I’m the man they’ll bother.⁠ ⁠… There’ll be an inquest, of course.⁠ ⁠… And I’m afraid you’ll have to give evidence, John⁠ ⁠… say what you said before, you know⁠ ⁠… say you lost it⁠ ⁠… about three weeks ago⁠ ⁠… that’s what I said⁠ ⁠… somebody must have picked it up.⁠ ⁠… I’m awfully sorry, John⁠—but it will be all right.⁠ ⁠…” Then, doubtfully, “Of course, John⁠ ⁠… if you’d rather⁠ ⁠… I’ll go at once and tell them the whole thing.⁠ ⁠… I hate the idea of you⁠ ⁠… but there’s Margery.⁠ ⁠… The doctor said⁠ ⁠… I don’t know what would happen.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>John was roused at last. “Of course not, Stephen⁠ ⁠… you’re not to think of it⁠ ⁠… it’ll be all right, as you say.⁠ ⁠… Only⁠ ⁠… only⁠ ⁠…” with a strange fierceness, “I wish to God it had never happened.” And he looked at Stephen very straight and stern, almost comically stern.</p>
			<p>“So do I,” said Stephen, with a heavy sigh. For the first time since the policeman left he had the old sense of guiltiness and gloom.</p>
			<p>“There’s one thing, Stephen⁠ ⁠…” John hesitated and stammered a little. “I’ve heard some awful rumours about⁠ ⁠… about that girl⁠ ⁠… immoral and so on⁠ ⁠… they’re not true, are they?⁠ ⁠… anyhow, don’t let’s encourage them, Stephen⁠ ⁠… it’s not necessary⁠ ⁠… and I don’t like it.⁠ ⁠…” He stopped, and was aware that he was blushing.</p>
			<p>It was a lame presentation of what he had intended as a firm unanswerable ultimatum: “If you want me to help you, you must drop all this.” But Stephen somehow always intimidated him.</p>
			<p>Stephen thought, “The damned old prig!” He said, “What <em>do</em> you mean, John? You don’t imagine I⁠ ⁠… these servants, I suppose⁠ ⁠… but I quite agree.⁠ ⁠… I must go and see Margery now. So long, John⁠ ⁠… and thank you so much.”</p>
			<p>John went up into his garden and into his house and sat for a long time in a leather chair thinking and wondering. Stephen walked briskly in and whispered to the nurse. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne was asleep.</p>
			<p>He sat down at the sunny table in the study window, and drew out again the long poem. It was a good idea⁠—a very good idea. He read through what he had written; uneven, yes, but there was good stuff in it. A little polishing up wanted, a little correction. All that bit in the middle.⁠ ⁠… He scratched out “white” and scribbled over it “pale.” Yes, that was better. The next part, about the snow, was rather wordy⁠—wanted condensing; there were six lines, and four at least were very good⁠—but one of them must go⁠—perhaps two. He sharpened a pencil, looking out at the river.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
