<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
			<p>The Chase was true to its highest traditions. Before the week was over it was known that the sum determined on by the Egerton Defence Fund Committee had been already promised, and more.</p>
			<p>Stephen Byrne, with a heavy heart, went to the “general meeting” on Tuesday evening. To have stayed away would have looked odd; also he was anxious to know the worst. He walked there as most men go to a battle, full of secret foreboding, yet dubiously glad of the near necessity for action. If, indeed, there was to be a libel action, backed by all the meddlesome resources of The Chase, things would have to come to a head. This was a development which had never been provided for in his calculations and plans. It would have been easier, somehow, if John had been arrested, charged by the Crown with murder. He would have known then what to do⁠—or he thought he would. He wished now that he had been to see John, found out what he was thinking. But he was nervous of John now, or rather he was nervous of himself. He could not trust himself not to do something silly if he met John in private again; the only thing to do was to try to forget him, laugh at him if possible. And that was the devil of this libel business. He would have to be there himself, he would have to give evidence again, and sit there probably while poor old John was stammering and mumbling in the box. Yet he had done it before⁠—why not again? Somehow he felt that he could not do it again. It all seemed different now.</p>
			<p>And that poem! Why the hell had he written it? Why had he sent it to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Argus</i>. He had had it typed on Thursday, and sent it off by special messenger on Friday, just in time for the <time datetime="1919-10">October</time> number. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Argus</i> liked long poems. What a fool he had been! Or had he? He knew very well himself what it all meant⁠—but how could anyone else connect it with life⁠—with Emily Gaunt? No, that was all right. And it was damned good stuff! He was glad he had sent it. It would go down well. And another day would have meant missing the <time datetime="1919-10">October</time> number.</p>
			<p>Yes, it was damned good stuff! He stood at the Whittakers’ door, turning over in his head some favourite lines from Gelert’s speech in the forest. Damned good! As he thought how excellent it was, there was a curious sensation of tingling and contraction in the flesh of his body and the back of his legs.</p>
			<p>When he came out, an hour later, he was a happier man. He was almost happy. For it had been announced at the meeting, with all the solemnity of shocked amazement, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton had refused to avail himself of the generous undertakings of The Chase and neighbourhood. The money promised would enable him to sue with an easy mind. But he would not sue.</p>
			<p>There was nothing to be done, then, but put and carry votes of thanks to the unofficial Committee for their labour and enterprise, to Whittaker for the use of his house, to Henry Stimpson for his wasted efforts. The last of these votes was felt by most to be effort equally wasted, since they knew well that Henry Stimpson had in fact thoroughly enjoyed collecting promises and cash, and had now the further unlooked-for delight of having to return the money already subscribed.</p>
			<p>This done, the meeting broke up with a sense that they had been thwarted, or at any rate unreasonably debarred from a legitimate exercise of their communal instincts.</p>
			<p>But apart from this intelligible disappointment there was a good deal of head-shaking, and plain, if not outspoken, disapproval of Egerton’s conduct. Stephen, moving among the crowd, gathered easily the sense of The Chase, and it had veered surprisingly since Whittaker’s announcement. For John Egerton had advanced, it seemed, the astounding reason that he might <em>lose</em> the case. To the simple people of The Chase⁠—as indeed to the simple population of England⁠—there was only one test to a libel action. Either you won or you lost. The complex cross-possibilities of justification and privilege and fair comment and the rest of it, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Dimple was heard to be apologetically explaining in a corner to a deaf lady, were lost upon them. If you failed to win your case, what the other man said was true, and if you were not confident of winning, your conscience could not be absolutely clear. The meeting rather felt that John Egerton had let them down, but they were certain that he had let himself down. And it was clear that even his staunchest supporters, men like Whittaker and Tatham, were shaken in their allegiance.</p>
			<p>But Stephen Byrne was happy. He had trusted to luck again, and luck, or rather the quixotic lunacy of John Egerton, had saved him again. It was wonderful. It was all over now. John had finally made his bed, and he must lie on it. He thought little of what this must mean to John, this aggravation of the local suspicions. He saw only one thing, that yet another wall had been raised between himself and exposure, that once more his anxieties might be thrust into the background. That he might settle down again with a comfortable mind to literature and domestic calm. He had forgotten with his fears his compunction of an hour ago; he had forgotten even to feel grateful to John; and if he thought of him with pity, it was a contemptuous pity. He saw John now as a kind of literary figure of high but laughable virtue, a man so virtuous as to be ridiculous, a mere foil to the heroic daredevils of life⁠—such as Gelert and Stephen Byrne.</p>
			<p>So he came to his own house, thinking again of those excellent lines of Gelert’s speech. In the hall he composed in his mind the description of the meeting which he would give to Margery.</p>
			<p>But Margery, too, was thinking of Gelert. She was reading the manuscript of “The Death in the Wood.” She had watched Stephen go out in a slow gloom to the meeting, and then she had hurried to the table and taken guiltily the bundle from the special manuscript drawer. For Stephen, with the sentimental fondness of many writers for the original work of their own hands, preserved his manuscripts long after they had been copied in type and printed and published. Twice during the last week she had gone to that drawer, but each time she had been interrupted. And at each reading her curiosity and admiration had grown.</p>
			<p>She had suspected nothing⁠—had imagined no sort of relation between Stephen’s life and Gelert’s adventures. There was no reason why she should. For she detested⁠—as she had been taught by Stephen to detest⁠—the conception of art as a vast autobiography. Stephen’s personality was in the feeling and in the phrasing of his work; and that was enough for her; the substance was a small matter.</p>
			<p>Even the incident of the maiden in the wood, her death and her concealment in the lake, had scarcely stirred the memory of Emily. For the reverent and idyllic scene in which the two knights had “laid” the body of the maiden among the reeds and water lilies of the lake, to be discovered by her kinsmen peeping through the tangled thickets of wild rose, was as remote as possible from the sordid ugliness of Emily’s disposal and discovery in a muddy sack near Barnes.</p>
			<p>But now she had finished. And she did suspect. When she came to the passage describing Gelert’s remorse for the betrayal of his old companion-at-arms, his gloomy bearing and penitent vows, she thought suddenly of Stephen’s late extravagant gloom, which she was still unable to understand. And then she suspected. Idly the thought came, and idly she put it away. But it returned, and she hated herself because of it. It grew to a stark suspicion, and she sat for a moment in an icy terror, frozen with pain by her imaginations. Then in a fever of anxiety she went back to the beginning of the manuscript, and hurried through it again, noting every incident of the story in the hideous light of her suspicions. And as she turned over the untidy pages, the terror grew.</p>
			<p>In the light of this dreadful theory so many things were explained⁠—little odd things which had puzzled her and been forgotten⁠—Stephen’s surprising anxiety when Michael was born (and Emily disappeared), and that evening in the summer, when they had all been so silent and awkward together, and the drifting apart of Stephen and John, and John’s extraordinary evidence, and Stephen’s present depression. It was all so terribly clear, and the incidents of the poem so terribly fitted in. Margery moaned helplessly to herself, “Oh, <em>Stephen</em>!” When he came in, she was almost sure.</p>
			<p>It was curious that at first she thought nothing of Gelert’s illicit amours in the castle, the stealing of his own friend’s lady. That part of the poem, of course, was a piece of romantic imagination, with which she had no personal concern. But while she waited for Stephen, turning over the leaves once more, the thought did come to her, “If one part is true⁠—why not all?” But this thought she firmly thrust out. She was sure of him in <em>that</em> way, at any rate. She flung a cushion over the manuscript and waited.</p>
			<p>He came in slowly as he had gone out, but she saw at once that his gloom was somehow relieved. And as he told her in studied accents of distress the story of the meeting, there came to her a sick certainty that he was acting. He was not <em>really</em> sorry that John had thought it best not to take any action; he was glad.</p>
			<p>When he had finished, she said, in a hard voice which startled her, “What <em>do</em> you make of it, Stephen? Do you think he really did it?”</p>
			<p>Stephen looked at the fire, the first fire of late <time datetime="1919-09">September</time>, and he said, “God knows, Margery; God knows. He’s a funny fellow, John.” He sighed heavily and stared into the fire.</p>
			<p>And then she was quite sure.</p>
			<p>She stood up from the sofa, the manuscript in her hand, and came towards him.</p>
			<p>“Stephen,” she said, “I’ve been reading this⁠—You⁠—I⁠—oh, <em>Stephen</em>!”</p>
			<p>The last word came with a little wail, and she burst suddenly into tears, hiding her face against his shoulder. She stood there sobbing, and shaken with sobbing, and he tried to soothe her, stroking her hair with a futile caressing movement, and murmuring her name ridiculously, over and over again.</p>
			<p>It did not occur to him to go on acting, to pretend astonishment or incomprehension. She had blundered somehow on the secret, and perhaps it was better so. To her at least he could lie no more.</p>
			<p>At last the sobbing ceased, and he kissed her gently, and she turned from him automatically to tidy her hair in the glass.</p>
			<p>Then she said, still breathless and incoherent, “Stephen, is it true⁠—that <em>poor</em> Emily⁠—and poor John⁠—Oh, Stephen, how <em>could</em> you?”</p>
			<p>The tears were coming back, so he put his arms about her again. And he spoke quickly, saying anything, anything to hold her attention and keep away those terrible tears.</p>
			<p>“Darling, I was a fool⁠ ⁠… it was for your sake in the first place⁠—for your sake we kept it dark, I mean⁠—it was John’s idea⁠—and then⁠—I don’t know⁠—I was a beast⁠—But don’t worry. Tomorrow I’ll put it all right.⁠ ⁠… I’ll give myself up⁠—I⁠—”</p>
			<p>But at these words, and at the picture they raised, a great cry burst from her, “Oh, no, Stephen. No! no!⁠—you mustn’t.”</p>
			<p>And she seized the lapels of his coat and shook him fiercely in the intensity of her feeling, the human, passionate, protective feeling of a wife for her own man⁠—careless what evil he may have done if somehow he may be made safe for her.</p>
			<p>And Stephen was startled. He had not expected this. He said, stupidly, “But John⁠—what about John?⁠—don’t you want me⁠—don’t you⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“No, Stephen, no⁠—at least⁠—” and she stopped, thinking now of John, trying conscientiously to realize what was owed to him. Then she went on, in a broken torrent of pleading, “No, Stephen, it’s gone on so long now⁠—a little more won’t matter to him⁠—surely, Stephen⁠—and nobody <em>really</em> thinks he did it⁠—<em>nobody</em>, Stephen. It’s only people like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Vincent, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose was saying so only yesterday⁠—and it would mean⁠—it would mean⁠—what <em>would</em> it mean, Stephen⁠—Stephen, tell me?” But as she imagined what this would mean to Stephen she stood shuddering before him, her big eyes staring piteously at him.</p>
			<p>“It would mean⁠—O God, Margery, I don’t know⁠—” and he turned away.</p>
			<p>So for a long time she pleaded with him, in groping, inarticulate half-sentences. She never reproached him, never asked him how he had come to do a foul murder. She did not want to know that, she did not want to think of what it was <em>right</em> for him to do⁠—that was too dangerous. All that mattered was this danger⁠—a danger that could be avoided if she could only persuade him. And Stephen listened in a kind of stupor, listened miserably to the old excuses and arguments, and half-truths with which he had so often in secret convinced himself. But somehow, as Margery put them with all the prejudice of her passionate fears, they did not convince him. They stood out horribly in their nakedness. And though he was touched and amazed by the strength of her forgiveness and her love in the face of this knowledge, he wished almost that she had not forgiven him, had urged him with curses to go out and do his duty. No, he did not wish that, really. But he did wish she would leave him alone now, leave him to think. He <em>must</em> think.</p>
			<p>His eye fell on the manuscript lying on the floor, and he began to wonder what it was in the poem that had told her, and how much it had told. She had said nothing of that. He interrupted her: “How⁠—how did you guess?” He jerked his head at the paper.</p>
			<p>She told him. And as she went again through that terrible process in her mind, that other thought returned, that idle notion about the wooing in the castle, which she had flung away from her.</p>
			<p>She said, faltering and slow, her lips trembling, “Stephen⁠—there’s nothing else in it⁠ ⁠… is there?⁠ ⁠… I ought to have guessed?⁠—Stephen, you <em>do</em> love me⁠—don’t you?” She stepped uncertainly towards him, and then with a loud cry, “Darling, I <em>do</em>!” he caught her to him. And she knew that it was true.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
