<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
			<p>In moments of crisis the human mind can become extraordinarily efficient. Before the bell was silent in the basement, the mind of Stephen Byrne, kneeling in a sweat by the dead body of a housemaid, had covered a vast field of circumstance and performed two or three distinct logical processes. His first instinct was to put out the light. With that person peering on the doorstep the light in the hall had better be out. He felt exposed, naked, illuminated. On the other hand, one could see practically nothing through the frosted glass from outside, only the shadow of anyone actually moving in the hall. That he knew from experience. Probably the person⁠—whoever it was⁠—could see nothing that was on the floor, nothing that was below the level of his or her interfering eye. If Stephen stayed still as he was, the person might never know he was there, might even go away in disgust. To put the light out would be a gratuitous advertisement that somebody was in the house. Besides, it would look so rude.</p>
			<p>Stephen did not turn out the light. He knelt there on two knees and a hand, staring like a snake at the front door. With his right hand he was stealthily scratching his left armpit. It was itching intolerably. And his dress-collar was sticking into his neck. He was intensely conscious of these things.</p>
			<p>But all the time the precipitate arguments were jostling in his brain. What sort of person would peer through the glass? Surely a very familiar thing to do. He could think of a few people who would do it⁠—the Whittakers⁠—but they were away; his wife⁠—but it was too early, and she had a latchkey; John Egerton⁠—but Stephen thought he was out. Or a policeman, of course.</p>
			<p>A policeman who had heard the screaming, or been told of the screaming, might do it, or even a neighbouring busybody, if he had heard. But they would have clattered up to the door, run up or stopped importantly on the doorstep⁠—probably hammered with the knocker. The person had not done that. He had only rung that damnable bell.</p>
			<p>The person’s head disappeared. He gave a loud knock with the big brass knocker which Stephen had bought in Jerusalem. Just one knock. Then the whole world was silent. Stephen’s heart thumped like a steam-engine going at slow speed. He thought, “It’s true what they say in the books.⁠ ⁠… I can hear it.”</p>
			<p>The person shuffled its feet on the step.</p>
			<p>“My God!” said Stephen again. “My God!”</p>
			<p>In the hall there was an enormous silence. A tug hooted dismally on the river. Stephen started scratching again. He was thinking of his wife now, of Margery. He loved Margery⁠—he loved her very truly and well. And she was just going to have a baby. What would she⁠—How would she⁠—O God!</p>
			<p>But she must not know. He would do something in a minute when the damned fool had gone away. Why the hell didn’t he go away, and leave a man alone? It must be some kind of visitor⁠—not a policeman, or a panicky neighbour. They would have been more impatient. Why the hell didn’t he go? It was Whittaker, perhaps. Or that South American chap.</p>
			<p>The person did not go away. For the person had only been on the doorstep for thirty seconds in all, and the person was in no hurry.</p>
			<p>Soon he would go away⁠—he must go <b>away</b>, Stephen thought. The <em>hours</em> he had been out there. It must be a long time, because Stephen’s knees were so sore. And he did want to get on with doing something⁠—he was not clear what⁠—but something. “God will provide,” he thought.</p>
			<p>And as he uttered that hideous blasphemy the person began to whistle. He whistled gently an air from <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">I Pagliacci</i>, and to Stephen Byrne, it was merciful music. For it was a favourite tune of John Egerton’s, bowled often by both of them at casual gatherings of the Hammerton Choir in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bryne’s drawing-room. It must be John, after all, this person on the doorstep; good old John⁠—thank God! If it was John, he would let him in; he would tell him the whole story. John must help him.</p>
			<p>It was suddenly revealed to Stephen that he could not bear this burden alone. It was too much. John was the man.</p>
			<p>But one must be careful. One must make sure. A cunning look came into his eyes. With elaborate stealth he crawled backwards from Emily’s body and so into Emily’s bedroom, which looked over the street. Under the blind he reconnoitred the front doorstep. The back of the person was turned towards him, but it was clear to him that the person was John Egerton, though he could only see part of the back and nothing of the head. No two persons in Hammerton Chase, or probably in the world, wore a shabby green coat like that. It was certainly John, come round for some singing, no doubt. He walked back boldly into the hall. He was cooler now, and his heart was working more deliberately. But he was horribly afraid. He put out the lights.</p>
			<p>Then he opened the front door, very grudgingly, and looked round the corner.</p>
			<p>“Hullo!” said Egerton.</p>
			<p>“Hullo!” said Stephen. “Come in,” and then, with a sudden urgency⁠—“<em>quick!</em>”</p>
			<p>John Egerton came slowly in and stood still in the dark.</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter?” he asked.</p>
			<p>Stephen said, “I’m in a hole,” and turned on the light.</p>
			<p>It was very badly managed. No doubt he should have hidden Emily away before he opened the door; should have led up gradually to the ultimate revelation; should have carefully prepared a man like Egerton for a sight like the body of Emily Gaunt. For it was a coarse and terrible sight. She lay on her back by the hatstand, with her dark hair tumbled on the floor, her face mottled and blue, her eyes gaping disgustingly, her throat marked and inflamed with the fingers of her employer. The coat of Cook was crumpled beneath her, and she had torn great rents in her nightdress in her desperate resistance, so that she lay half-naked in the cruel glare of the electric light. Her two plump legs were crossed fantastically like the legs of a crusader, but so that the feet were wide apart. Her pink flesh glistened and smelt powerfully of soap.</p>
			<p>It was not the kind of thing to spring upon any man, least of all should it have been sprung upon Egerton. For he was a highly sensitive man and easily shocked. He had not been, like Stephen, to the war⁠—being a Civil Servant and imperfect in the chest⁠—and in an age when the majority of living young men have looked largely on, and become callous about, death, John Egerton had never seen a dead body.</p>
			<p>And he was a person of extraordinary modesty, in the sense in which most women but few men possess modesty. He had a real chastity of thought which few men ever achieve. John Egerton was no prig. Only he had this natural purity of outlook which made him actually blush when indelicate things were said on the stage or hinted at in private society.</p>
			<p>And now he was suddenly confronted in the house of his best friend with the dead and disgusting body of a half-naked female. He was inexpressibly shocked.</p>
			<p>When the light went on and he looked down at the floor, his mouth opened suddenly, but he said no word; he only stared incredulously at the sprawling flesh.</p>
			<p>Then he began to blush. A faint flush travelled slowly over his rather sallow face. He looked up then at Stephen, watching anxiously in the corner.</p>
			<p>“What the devil⁠—” he said.</p>
			<p>From the tone in which he spoke, Stephen realized suddenly the error he had made. Pulling down a coat from a peg, he flung it over the body. Only a few times had he heard John Egerton speak like that and look like that, but he knew quite clearly what it meant. John should have been kept out of this. Or he should have had it broken to him. Of course. But there was no time⁠—no time⁠—that was the trouble. Stephen looked at his watch. It was twenty to ten. At any moment his wife might be back. Something must be done.</p>
			<p>He opened the dining-room door. “Come in here,” he said, and they went in.</p>
			<p>John Egerton stood by the sideboard looking very grim and perplexed. He could not be called handsome, not at least beside Stephen Byrne. There was less intellect but more character in his face, a kind of moral refinement in the adequate jaw and steady grey eyes, set well apart under indifferent eyebrows. His face was pale from too much office-work, and he had the habit of a forward stoop, from peering nervously at new people. These things gave him, somehow, a false air of primness, and a little detracted from the kindliness, the humanity, which was the secret of his character and his charm. For ultimately men were charmed by John, though a deep-seated shyness concealed him from them at a first meeting. His voice was soft and unassuming, his mouth humorous but firm. He had slightly discoloured teeth, not often visible. Stephen’s teeth were admirable and flashed attractively when he smiled.</p>
			<p>“What’s it all mean?” John said. “Is she⁠—”</p>
			<p>Stephen said, “She’s dead⁠ ⁠… it’s Emily, our maid.”</p>
			<p>“How?” Egerton began.</p>
			<p>“I⁠—I was playing the fool⁠ ⁠… pretended I was going to kiss her, you know⁠ ⁠… the little fool thought I meant it⁠ ⁠… got frightened⁠ ⁠… then something⁠ ⁠… I don’t know what happened exactly⁠ ⁠… she bumped her head.⁠ ⁠… Oh, damn it, there’s no time to explain⁠ ⁠… we’ve got to get her away somehow⁠ ⁠… and I want you to help⁠ ⁠… Margery⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Get her away?” said John; “but the police⁠ ⁠… you can’t⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>John Egerton was still far from grasping the full enormity of the position. He had been badly shocked by the sight of the body. He was shocked by his friend’s incoherent confession of some vulgar piece of foolery with a servant. He was amazed that a man like Stephen should even “pretend” that he was going to kiss a servant. That kind of thing was not done in The Chase, and Stephen was not that kind of man, he thought. No doubt he had had a little too much wine, flung out some stupid compliment or other; there had been a scuffle, and then some accident, a fall or something⁠—the girl probably had a weak heart; fleshy people often did: it was all very horrible and regrettable, but not criminal. Nothing to be kept from the police.</p>
			<p>But it was damnably awkward, of course, with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne in that condition. Stephen’s spluttering mention of her name had suddenly reminded him of that. There would be policemen, fusses, inquests, and things. She would be upset. John had a great regard for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne. She oughtn’t to be upset just now. But it couldn’t be helped.</p>
			<p>Stephen Byrne was pouring out port again⁠—a full glass. He lifted and drank it with an impatient urgency, leaning back his black head. Some of the wine spilled out as he drank, and flowed stickily down his chin. Three drops fell on his crumpled shirtfront and swelled slowly into pear-shaped stains.</p>
			<p>His friend’s failure to understand was clearly revealed to him, and filled him with an unreasonable irritation. It was his own fault of course. He should have told him the whole truth. But somehow he couldn’t⁠—even now⁠—though every moment was precious. Even now he could not look at John and tell him simply what he had done. He took a napkin from the sideboard drawer and rubbed it foolishly across his shirtfront, as he spoke. He said:</p>
			<p>“Oh, for God’s sake, John⁠ ⁠… don’t you understand⁠ ⁠… I⁠ ⁠… I believe I⁠ ⁠… I’ve killed her⁠ ⁠… myself⁠ ⁠… I don’t know.” He looked quickly at John and away again. John’s honest mouth was opening. His grey eyes were wide and horrified. When Stephen saw that, he hurried on, “I may be wrong⁠ ⁠… but anyhow Margery mustn’t know anything about it⁠ ⁠… you <em>must</em> see that⁠ ⁠… it would probably kill her⁠ ⁠… and she’ll be back any moment now. Oh, <em>come</em> on, for God’s sake.” A sudden vision of his wife walking through the front door on to that horrible thing in the hall spurred him to the door.</p>
			<p>John Egerton stood still by the solid table, his hands gripping the edge of it behind him. He understood now.</p>
			<p>“Good God!” he said quickly, as if to himself, and again, “Good God!” Then starting up, “But, Stephen, it’s⁠ ⁠… it’s⁠ ⁠… you mean⁠ ⁠…” Suddenly the word “murder” had flashed into his thoughts, and that word seemed to light up the whole ghastly business, made it immediately more hideous. “It’s <em>murder</em>,” he had been going to say, but some fantastic sense of delicacy stopped him.</p>
			<p>Stephen halted at the door. A wild rage came over him. There was a strange kind of fierce resolution about him then which his friend had never seen before.</p>
			<p>“Oh, for God’s sake, don’t stand dithering there, John,” he flung back. “Are you going to help me or not? If not, clear out⁠ ⁠… if you are, come on⁠ ⁠… quick, before Margery comes.” He went into the hall.</p>
			<p>John Egerton said no more, but followed. That illuminating unspoken word “murder,” which had shown him the whole awfulness of this affair had shown him also the urgency of the present moment, the necessity of helping Stephen to “get her away.” For Margery Byrne’s sake. Just how he felt towards Stephen at that moment, what he would have done if Stephen had been a bachelor, he had had not time to consider. And it did not matter. For <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne’s⁠—for Margery’s⁠—sake, something must be done, as Stephen said. And he, John Egerton, must help.</p>
			<p>“What are you going to do?” he said.</p>
			<p>Stephen was crouched on his haunches, busily tidying Emily’s nightdress, pulling it about.</p>
			<p>“The river,” he said shortly. “It’s high tide⁠—Thank God!” he added.</p>
			<p>John Egerton looked shrinkingly at the torn and ineffective nightdress, at the wide spaces of pink flesh showing through the rents. He could not imagine himself picking up that body. He said, “What?⁠—like⁠—like <em>that</em>?”</p>
			<p>Stephen looked up. “Yes,” he said; “why not?” But he knew very well why not. Because of a certain insane sense of decency which governs even a murderer in the presence of death. Emily Gaunt must not be “got away” like that! Besides, it would be dangerous. He thought for a moment. Then, “No,” he said. “Wait a minute,” and clattered down the basement stairs.</p>
			<p>When he came back he was trailing behind him a long and capacious sack, which had hung on a nail in the scullery for the receipt of waste paper and bottles and odds and ends of domestic refuse. The sack, fortunately, had been only half full. All its contents he had tumbled recklessly on the scullery floor. But as he came up the stairs he was curiously disturbed by the thought of that refuse. What was to be done with it? What would Margery say? The scullery had been recently cleaned out, he knew. And the sack? How could he explain its disappearance? These damned details.</p>
			<p>“Here you are,” he said. “This will do,” and he laid the sack on the floor.</p>
			<p>He began to put Emily into the sack. He drew the mouth of the sack over her feet. They were already cold. John Egerton stood stiffly under the light, in a kind of paralysis of disgust. He felt “I must help!⁠ ⁠… I must help!” but somehow he could not move a finger.</p>
			<p>The sack was over the knees now. It was strangely difficult. The toes kept catching.</p>
			<p>But Stephen was fantastically preoccupied with the refuse on the scullery floor, with coming explanations about the sack. “There’ll be an awful row,” he said⁠ ⁠… “the hell of a mess down there⁠ ⁠… what shall I say about the sack?” Then, suddenly, “What shall I say, John?⁠ ⁠… Think of something, for God’s sake!”</p>
			<p>John Egerton jumped. The wild incongruity of Stephen’s question scarcely occurred to him. He tried solemnly to think of something to say about the sack. He would be helpful here, surely. But no thought came. His mind was a confused muddle of nightdresses and inquests and naked legs and Margery Byrne⁠—Margery Byrne arriving quietly on the doorstep⁠—Margery Byrne scandalized, agonized, hideously, fatally ill.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know, Stephen,” he said feebly⁠—“I don’t know⁠ ⁠… say you⁠ ⁠… oh, anything.”</p>
			<p>He was fascinated now by the progress of the sack, which had nearly covered the legs. He saw clearly that a moment was coming when he would <em>have</em> to help, when one of them would have to lift Emily and one of them manipulate the sack. Already Stephen was cursing and in difficulties. The nightdress kept rucking up and had to be pulled back, and when that was done the sack lost ground again.</p>
			<p>“Oh, hell!” he said, with a note of final exasperation, “lend a hand, John⁠—lift her a bit,” and then as John still hesitated, sick with reluctance, “Oh, <em>lift</em> her, can’t you?”</p>
			<p>John stooped down. The moment had come. He put his hands under the small of Emily’s back, shuddering as he touched her. With an effort he lifted her an inch or two. With a great heave Stephen advanced the sack six inches. Then it caught again in those maddening toes. With a guttural exclamation of rage he turned back towards the feet and tugged furiously at the sack. When it was free John Egerton had relaxed his hold. Emily was lying heavy on the slack of the sack. He was gazing with a kind of helpless horror at the purple inflammation of Emily’s throat, realizing for the first time just how brutal and violent her end had been.</p>
			<p>Stephen cursed again. “Lift, damn you, <em>lift</em>⁠—oh, hell!”</p>
			<p>John lifted, and with a wild fumbling impatience the whole of Emily’s body was covered. Only the head and one arm were left. They had forgotten the arm. It lay flung out away from the body, half hidden under an overcoat. Stephen seized it savagely and tried to bend it in under the mouth of the sack, with brutal ridiculous tugs, like an ill-tempered man packing an overloaded bag. John watched him with growing disapproval.</p>
			<p>“That’s no good,” he said. “Pull down the sack again.”</p>
			<p>Stephen did so. The sweat now was running down his face; he was spent and panting, and his composure was all gone. With his black hair ruffled over his forehead he looked wicked.</p>
			<p>Something of his impatience had communicated itself to John, mastering even his abhorrence. He wanted furiously to get the thing done. It was he now who seized the recalcitrant arm and thrust it into the sack; it was he who fiercely pulled the sack over Emily’s head, and hid at last that puffy and appalling face with a long “Ah‑h” of relief. At the mouth of the sack was a fortunate piece of cord, threaded through a circle of ragged holes.</p>
			<p>John Egerton pulled it tight and fumbled at the making of a knot. He felt vaguely that something special in the way of knots was required⁠—a bowline⁠—a reef knot or something⁠—not a “granny,” anyhow. How was it you tied a reef knot? Dimly remembered instructions came to him⁠—“the same string over both times”⁠—or “under,” wasn’t it?</p>
			<p>Stephen crouched at his side, dazedly watching his mobile fingers muddling with the cord.</p>
			<p>A step sounded outside on the pavement. Stephen woke up with a whispered “My God!” and panic snatched at the pair of them. Feverishly John finished his knot and tugged at the ends. It was a “granny,” he saw, but a granny it must remain. The steps had surely stopped outside the door.</p>
			<p>“Quick,” he whispered, and got his right arm under the sack. Stumbling and straining, with a reckless disturbance of rugs and mats, they bundled the sagging body of Emily Gaunt into the dining-room. In the dining-room John Egerton halted and laid his end of her down. He was not strong, and she was heavy. Stephen clung to her feet, and the two of them stood listening, very shaky and afraid. There was no sound in the street now. The steps must have passed the door. From the rear there was the melancholy hooting of a tug, calling for its waiting barges at Ginger Wharf. They could hear the slow, methodical panting of her engines and the furtive swish of the water at her bows. In the garden a cat was wailing⁠—horribly like a child in pain. To John Egerton these familiar sounds seemed like the noises of a new world, the new world he had entered at about <time datetime="1919-05-15T21:15">a quarter-past nine</time>, when he had become a partner, an accomplice, in this wretched piece of brutality and deceit. He felt curiously identified with it now⁠—he was part of it, not merely an impersonal observer. He had a sensation of personal guilt.</p>
			<p>“It’s all right,” said somebody, very far away, in the voice of Stephen Byrne⁠—a hoarse and furtive voice.</p>
			<p>John Egerton picked up his burden, and another staggering stage was accomplished into the conservatory.</p>
			<p>It was dusk now, but a large moon was up, and thin streams of silver filtered through the opaque roof and the crowded vine-leaves on to the long bundle on the floor. It was too light, Stephen thought, for this kind of work.</p>
			<p>When they had halted he said, “Wait a minute, John⁠—I’ll go and see if the coast is clear.” He went quickly down the stone steps into the tiny garden. The long, rich grass of Stephen’s “lawn” was drenched and glistening with dew. There was the heavy scent of something in the next-door garden, and over all a hot, intolerable stillness. Stephen became suddenly oppressed with the sense of guilt. Instinctively he stepped on to the wet grass and rustled softly through it to the river, his silk socks sponging up the dew.</p>
			<p>Over the shallow wall he inspected furtively the silent river. Nothing moved. It was slack water, and the downward procession of tugs had not properly begun. The water was smooth; the black reflections of the opposite trees were sharp and perfect. Down towards Hammersmith a few lights hung like pendant jewels in the water. Over the far houses there was a flicker like summer lightning from an electric train. A huddle of driftwood and odd refuse floated motionless in midstream, very black and visible, waiting for the tide to turn; but along the edges the stream already crept stealthily down, lapping softly against the moored ranks of boats, against Stephen’s boat riding comfortably beneath him. In the neighbouring gardens nothing moved. About this hour in the hot weather the residents of Hammerton Chase would creep out secretly into their gardens and cast their refuse into the river, and there was often to be heard at dusk a scattered succession of subdued splashes.</p>
			<p>But tonight there were no splashes. Probably the duty was already done. Stephen remembered incongruously this local habit, and was at once relieved and disappointed. Too many people prowling in their gardens might be dangerous. On the other hand, there was a certain safety in a multitude of splashes. One more would have made no difference.</p>
			<p>There were no splashes now, and scarcely any sound: only the fretful muttering of distant traffic, the occasional rumble of buses on the far-off bridge, and the small plops of fishes leaping at the moon. Close to Stephen was an unobtrusive munching in the wired space where Joan’s rabbits were kept. A buck rabbit lay hunched in the moonlight masticating contentedly the last remnants of the evening cabbage. Another nosed at the wire-netting, begging without conviction for further illicit supplies. Stephen stooped down automatically and rubbed his nose.</p>
			<p>But for the moonlight and the present slackness of the tide the moment was propitious. Stephen walked back more boldly into the conservatory. “You take the feet,” he said.</p>
			<p>Without further speech they picked up the bundle and descended laboriously into the garden. The bright moon intimidated John. He looked back over his shoulder for people peering out of windows. But only the windows of his own house commanded the garden; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam, his housekeeper, would be long since in bed. Paddling quietly through the dew, he, too, thought fantastically of other burdens he had smuggled down to the river on many a breathless night, pailfuls of potato-peelings and old tins and ashes. In his mind he gave a mute hysterical chuckle at the thought. What other residents, he wondered, had taken this kind of contraband through their gardens in the secret night? Old Dimple, the barrister⁠—ha! ha!⁠—or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ambrose? Perhaps they, too, had strangled people in their house and consigned them guiltily to the condoning Thames. Perhaps all those sober, respectable people were capable, like Stephen, of astonishing crimes. Nothing, now, could be really surprising. God, what’s that?</p>
			<p>There was a sudden scuffle and clatter in the dark angle by the river wall⁠—only the rabbits panicking into corners at the silent coming of a stranger. But John was aware of the violent beating of his heart.</p>
			<p>They laid Emily on the ground and looked over the wall. The tide now had definitely turned. The middle stream was smoothly moving, oily and swift. John felt happier. It would soon be over now. An easy thing, to slip her over into the friendly water⁠ ⁠… no more of this hideous heaving and fumbling with a cold body in a sweat of anxiety.</p>
			<p>But to Stephen, regarding doubtfully the close row of boats a hundred yards downstream, new and disquieting uncertainties had occurred. To him, too, it had seemed a simple thing to drop Emily over the wall and let the river dispose of her. But supposing the river failed, flung her against the mooring-chain of one of those boats, jammed her with the tide under the sloping bows of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Adamson’s decrepit hulk, left her there till the tide went down.⁠ ⁠… He saw with a frightening clearness Emily Gaunt being discovered in the morning on the muddy foreshore of Hammerton Terrace⁠—discovered by Andrews, the longshoreman, or a couple of small boys, or Thingummy Rawlins, prowling down from his garden to tinker with his motorboat.⁠ ⁠… No, that would never do.</p>
			<p>He said in a low voice, “John⁠ ⁠… we’ll have to take her out in the boat⁠ ⁠… we can’t just drop her.⁠ ⁠… These damned boats⁠ ⁠… supposing she caught⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>John Egerton uttered a long groan of disappointment. It was not all over, then. There must be more liftings and irritations, more damnable association with this vileness.</p>
			<p>“O <em>Lord</em>!” he protested. “Stephen, I can’t.⁠ ⁠…” His face was pale and almost piteous under the moon.</p>
			<p>Stephen answered him without petulance this time. “John, old man⁠—for God’s sake, see it through⁠ ⁠… we <em>must</em> get on, and I can’t do it without you.⁠ ⁠… I’m awfully sorry.⁠ ⁠… It’s got to be done.⁠ ⁠…” The appeal in his voice succeeded as an irritable outburst could not have done.</p>
			<p>John Egerton braced himself again. In his own mind he recognized the practical wisdom of using the boat. He said with a great weariness, “Come on then.”</p>
			<p>It was a long and difficult business getting that body into the boat. A flight of wooden steps led down from the wall to the water, and from there the boat⁠—a small motorboat, half-dinghy, half-canoe⁠—had to be hauled in with a boathook for Stephen to step acrobatically into her and unfasten the moorings. Then she had to be paddled close up under the wall and fastened lightly to the steps. While Stephen was doing this a tug swished by, with a black string of barges clinging clumsily astern. The red eye of her port-light glared banefully across the water. John felt that the man in that tug must guess infallibly what work he was at. A solitary lantern in the stern of the sternmost barge flickered about the single figure standing at the tiller. He could see the face of the man, turned unmistakably towards him.</p>
			<p>She was travelling fast, and Stephen cursed as her wash took hold of his little boat and tossed her up and banged her against the wall and the rickety steps. John, leaning anxiously over, could hear his muttered execrations as he fended her off.</p>
			<p>Then there was a hot, whispered argument⁠—on the best way of getting the body down, Stephen standing swaying in the boat, with his face upturned, like some ridiculous moonlight lover, John flinging down assertions and reasonings in a forced whisper which broke now and then into a harsh undertone. Stephen thought it should be carted down the steps. John, with an aching objection to further prolonged contact with the thing, said it should be lowered with a rope. “Haven’t you a bit of rope?” he reiterated⁠—“a bit of rope⁠—much the best.”</p>
			<p>Sick of argument, Stephen fumbled with wild mutterings in his locker, and brought out in a muddle of oilcans and tools a length of stout cord. Together they made a rough bight about Emily’s middle, together lifted her to the flat stone parapet of the wall.</p>
			<p>When she was there a dog barked suspiciously in Hammerton Terrace; another echoed him along The Chase. The two men crouched against the wall in a tense and ridiculous agitation.</p>
			<p>Through all these emergencies and arguments and muffled objurgations there stirred in John’s mind ironical recollections of passages in detective stories, where dead bodies were constantly being transported with facility and dispatch in any desired direction. It seemed so easy in the books, it was so damnably difficult in practice⁠—or so they were finding it.</p>
			<p>And always there was the menace of Margery’s return; she must be back soon, she would certainly come out into the garden on a night like this.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>When they had the body stretched flat and ready on the wall, Stephen went back into the boat. It had sidled down below the steps, and had to be hauled back. The tide was maddeningly strong. Stephen urged the boat with imprecations under the wall. To keep it there he must hold on stoutly with a boathook, and could give little help to John in the detested task of lowering the sack. John’s hands were clammy with sweat like the hands of a gross man. He gripped the rope with a desperate energy and thrust Emily gently over the side. The rope dragged and scraped across the parapet; the body swayed in the moonlight with a preposterous seesaw motion. When it was halfway to the water, they heard a tug puffing rhythmically towards them⁠—somewhere beyond the Island. It was not yet in sight, but a resistless unreasoning panic immediately invaded them. Stephen, with one free hand, clawed recklessly at an edge of sacking; John, in a furious effort to quicken the descent of Emily, lost altogether his control of the rope. The rope slipped swiftly through his moist and impotent palms. Emily, with an intimidating bump and a wooden clatter of sculls, fell ponderously into the boat and lay sprawled across the gunwale. A sibilant “Damned fool!” slid up the wall from Stephen, almost overbalanced by the sudden descent of the body. The two men waited with an elaborate assumption of innocence while the tug fussed past, their hearts pounding absurdly. Then, before the wash had come, John Egerton stepped gingerly down the creaking steps, and they pushed out into the rolling reflection of the moon. The nose of the boat lifted steeply on the oily swell of the tug’s wash, and the head of Emily slipped down with a thump over the thwart, her feet still projecting obliquely over the side; John Egerton pulled them in. He looked back with a new disquiet at the still and silvery houses of Hammerton Terrace, at the dim shrubberies along The Chase. There were lights in some of the houses. Out there under the public moon he felt very visible and suspect⁠—a naked feeling.</p>
			<p>He heard a remote mutter from Stephen, paddling in the bows: “Too many of these damned tugs!” and another: “This filthy <em>moon</em>!” They were working slowly against the tide between the Island and the mainland of The Chase. Stephen’s plan was to round the top of the Island, cross the river, and get rid of Emily in the shadows of the other side, drifting down with the tide.</p>
			<p>Even in the narrow channel by the bank the tide was exasperating, and paddling the boat, heavy with the engine, was slow work and strenuous. But the engine would be too noisy. And it was an uncertain starter.</p>
			<p>Stephen said at last, “Hell! get out the sculls!”</p>
			<p>John Egerton groped in the locker for rowlocks with an oppressive sense of incompetence and delay. His fingers moved with an ineffectual urgency in a messy confusion of spanners and oilcans, tins of grease, and slimy labyrinths of thin cord. Only one rowlock was discoverable. The finding of the second became in his mind a task of inconceivable importance and difficulty. Vast issues depended on it⁠—Stephen⁠ ⁠… Margery⁠ ⁠… babies⁠ ⁠… Emily Gaunt⁠ ⁠… and somehow or other <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam. Thunderous mutterings rolled down distantly from the bows. John groaned helplessly. He caught his fingers sharply on the edge of a screwdriver. “It’s not here⁠ ⁠… it’s not here⁠ ⁠… it <em>can’t</em> be, Stephen.” With a sense of heroic measures he hauled out in clattering handfuls the whole muddle of implements in the locker. Under the electric coil lurked the missing rowlock.</p>
			<p>“Row, then, like the devil,” ordered Stephen. Out here, in this strange watery adventure, Stephen was the readily acknowledged commander. John rowed, with grunts and splashings.</p>
			<p>They rounded the Island, the moon glowing remotely beyond it through the traceries of young willow stems. Stephen was doing something with an anchor at the mouth of the sack, breathing audibly through his nose. John sculled obliquely across the river, struggling against the tide, steadily losing ground, he felt. “Losing ground,” he thought insanely, “ought to be losing <em>water</em>, of course.” So strangely do the minds of men move in critical hours.</p>
			<p>When they were halfway over, the chunk-chunk of a motorboat came lazily upstream. “God!” said Stephen, “a police-boat.” John thought, “Will it <em>never</em> end?” It was appalling, this accumulation of obstacles and delays and potential witnesses. He was tired now, and acutely conscious of a general perspiration.</p>
			<p>They drifted downstream under the bank, while the police-boat phutted up on the far side, a low black shape without lights. Caped figures chattered easily in the stern and took no evident notice of the small white motorboat under the bank; but Stephen and John imagined fatal suspicions and perceptions proceeding under the peaked caps. They passed.</p>
			<p>“<em>Now!</em>” Stephen was fiddling with his anchor again, tugging at a knot; his tone was final. “Take her out into the middle again⁠ ⁠… <em>quick</em>!”</p>
			<p>John pulled gallantly with his left. They were opposite the house again now, moving smoothly towards Hammersmith Bridge. No other craft was in sight or sound.</p>
			<p>Stephen said thickly, “If we don’t get her over now, we never shall⁠ ⁠… stand by.⁠ ⁠… No, no⁠ ⁠… you trim the boat.⁠ ⁠… I’ll manage it.”</p>
			<p>He edged Emily close up against the gunwale, her extremities on a couple of thwarts, her middle sagging down the side of the boat. He looked quickly up the river and down the river and at Hammerton Terrace and at the oil-mills below and at the empty towpath on the opposite bank, all silent, all still. Stephen put a hand under the sack. Close by a tiny fish leaped lightly from the river. Stephen saw the flash of its belly, and took his hand away with a start. Then with a great heave under Emily’s middle, a violent pushing and lifting with feet and body and arms, that set the sculls clattering and the boat precariously rocking he got the body half over the gunwale, John perched anxiously on the other side, striving to correct the already dangerous list. Stephen struggled blasphemously with the infuriating sack. Somehow, somewhere it was maddeningly entangled with something in the boat. Frantic tugging and thrusting, irritable oaths, moved it not at all. John looked fearfully behind him. A lighted omnibus was swimming through space, perilously near⁠ ⁠… Hammersmith Bridge. Stephen was kicking the body now with a futile savagery.</p>
			<p>“What the hell?” he said. “O God!”</p>
			<p>John groped distantly with a hand in the dark. Then, “The anchor!” he said⁠—“the anchor’s caught.⁠ ⁠…” He heard a relieved “O Lord!” from Stephen, “thought I’d put the anchor end over first”⁠—and for the first time made himself a petulant comment, “Why the devil didn’t you?” It was too much⁠—this sort of thing. Then the shaggy end of the sack was slithering quietly over the side, the anchor twinkled swiftly in the moon, and the relieved boat rocked suddenly with a wild, delighted levity. Emily was gone.</p>
			<p>Peering back upstream, the two men saw a slowly expanding circle on the black water. And there were a few bubbles. Emily was indeed gone.</p>
			<p>Stephen sat in a limp posture of absolute exhaustion, his shoulders hunched, his head on his hands, speechless.</p>
			<p>John looked at his watch. It was a <time datetime="1919-05-15T22:15">quarter-past ten</time>⁠—only about an hour since Emily died. He stared incredulous at the faintly luminous hands. Then he looked round; the boat seemed to be drifting very fast. On his right were the boathouses, a dark huddle of boats clinging to the rafts in front of them. The boathouses were next to the Bridge.</p>
			<p>He looked back and up, with a new fear. The long span of the suspension bridge hung almost above them. A bus rumbled ominously above. Two persons were standing on the footpath against the parapet, looking down at the boat. He could see the pale blobs of their faces. One of them had a Panama hat.</p>
			<p>The boat shot into the dark under the Bridge.</p>
			<p>John leaned forward. “Stephen,” he whispered⁠—“Stephen.” There was no answer. John touched his knee. “Stephen.”</p>
			<p>A yellow face lifted slowly. “What is it?”</p>
			<p>“There was someone watching on the Bridge⁠ ⁠… two men.”</p>
			<p>Stephen sighed with a profound weariness.</p>
			<p>“It can’t be helped,” he said.</p>
			<p>A dreadful paralysis seemed to have succeeded the heavy strain. He looked as the men used to look after a long spell in the line, sitting at last in a dingy billet⁠—played out.</p>
			<p>John Egerton took the sculls and turned the boat round. The boat moved stiffly, with a steady gurgle at the bows; the noiseless tide swung violently by; the oars creaked complainingly.</p>
			<p>“This <em>tide</em>⁠ ⁠…” muttered John.</p>
			<p>Stephen Byrne raised his head. “The tide’s going out,” he said stupidly.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
