<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
			<p>So the weeks went by. And John and Stephen saw little of each other. Indeed, they saw little of anyone. Then, towards the end of <time datetime="1919-06">June</time>, Margery Byrne got up for the first time, and little Joan came home from her grandmother’s. In a week Margery was completely and delightedly “up,” full of plans and longing to take up life exactly where she had left it. Stephen found her curiously eager for company, and especially the company of old friends; it seemed to her so long since she had seen them. Very soon she asked why John Egerton was so neglecting them. “Get him to come round, Stephen,” she said. “Ring him up now.” Stephen had lately told her the story of the inquest, of the local feeling and faction; and Margery had at once determined that she would think nothing of it. She would do as the Whittakers did; not that she was prepared in any case to believe evil of John. Yet at the back of her mind there was just a hint of curiosity about it.</p>
			<p>So Stephen reluctantly rang him up⁠—reluctantly because he had wanted to work that evening, and because he feared this meeting. But he did not dare to seem unwilling.</p>
			<p>And John Egerton came. He had known for some days that he would soon have to do it, and he, too, had been afraid. But this evening he was almost glad of the invitation. The long weeks of semi-isolation had tried him very severely. The sense of being an outcast from his fellows, suspected, despised, had grown unreasonably and was a perpetual irritant to the nerves. He had an aching to go again into a friend’s house, to sit and talk again with other men. And even the house of the Byrnes and the company of the Byrnes might be a soothing relief from his present loneliness.</p>
			<p>And now that Margery was up and well, the time was surely near when something would be done about this business. Unpleasant things had happened. The family of the Gaunts had been to see him. They had come again this evening⁠—in the middle of supper⁠—sly, grasping, malicious people, a decayed husband of about fifty with a drooping, ragged moustache, with watery eyes and the aspect of a wet rat, and an upright, aggressive, spiteful little wife, with an antique bonnet fixed very firmly on the extreme summit of her yellowish hair. She had thin lips, a harsh voice, and an unpleasant manner. There was also a meek son of about twenty, and Emily’s fiancé, who looked conscientiously sad and respectable and wore a bowler hat. But the woman did all the talking. The men only interposed when they felt that she was going too far to be effective.</p>
			<p>They wanted money. The men might be half-ashamed of wanting it, but they wanted it, and they clearly expected to get it. They assumed as common ground that John had made away with Emily and had only been preserved from arrest by the strange eccentricities of the law. They did not want trouble made, but there it was: Emily had been a good daughter to them and had contributed money to the household; and it was only fair that something should be done to heal the injury to their affections and their accounts. If not, of course, there would <em>have</em> to be trouble.</p>
			<p>John Egerton, disgusted and humiliated, had nobly kept his temper, but firmly refused to give them a penny. They had gone away, muttering threats. John had no idea what they would do, but they filled him with loathing and fear. He could not endure this much longer for any man’s sake. Stephen must release him.</p>
			<p>But the evening at the Byrnes’ house did nothing to clear things up. Rather it aggravated the tangle. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne was lying on the sofa, looking more fragile yet more delicious than he had ever seen her. She greeted him very kindly and they talked for a little, while Stephen sat rather glumly in the window-seat staring out at the river.</p>
			<p>She spoke happily of Stephen Michael Hilary Byrne, of his charm and his intelligence, and how already he really had something of Stephen about him; and as she said that she smiled at Stephen. And she leaned back with a little sigh of content and looked round at her drawing-room, rich with warm and comfortable colour, at the striped material of delicate purple, at the Japanese prints she had bought with Stephen at a sale, at the curious but excellent wallpaper of dappled grey, and the pleasant rows of books on the white shelves, at the flowers in the Chinese bowl which Stephen had bought for her in some old shop, and the mass of roses on the shiny Sheraton table; then she looked out through the window at the red light of a tug sliding mysteriously down through the steely dark and back again at Stephen. And John knew that she was counting up her happiness; and he thought with an intense pity and rage how precarious that happiness was. He realized then that he could not allow Stephen to “do the right thing”; he would not press for it. After all, it was a small thing for himself to suffer, this petty local suspicion, even the visitations of the Gaunts, compared with the suffering which this dear and delicate lady would have to bear if the truth were told. Surely it was an easy sacrifice for a man to make.</p>
			<p>So John sat glowing with sentiment and resolution, and Margery pondered the happiness of life, and Stephen brooded darkly in the window, and they were all silent. Then Margery suggested that the two men should sing together as they used to do; and they sang. They sang odd things from an Old English song book, picked out at random as they turned over the leaves. And it seemed as if every song in that book must have for those two some hidden and sinister meaning. It was bad enough, in any case, to stand there together behind Margery at the piano, and try to sing as they had sung in the old days, when nothing had happened. But these songs had some terrible innuendoes: “Blow, blow, thou winter wind,” they sang first, and “Sigh no more, ladies.” And when they came to “a friend’s ingratitude” and “fellowship forgot” and “Men were deceivers ever,” the two men became foolishly self-conscious. They looked studiously in front of them, and each in his heart hoped that the other had not noticed, hoped that his own expression was perfectly normal and composed. It was exceedingly foolish. There were other songs like this, and after a few more Stephen said shortly that that was enough.</p>
			<p>Then they tried to talk again; but the men could think of no topic which did not somehow lead them near to Emily Gaunt and such dangerous ground. Even when Margery began to speak of the motorboat, the men seemed to be stricken silly and dumb. Margery wondered what ailed them, till she remembered about John’s “wood-collecting” evidence, and blushed suddenly at her folly.</p>
			<p>Stephen went down with John to the front door feeling certain that he would there and then “have it out.” But John said nothing, only a quick “Good night.” He did not look at Stephen. They felt then like strangers to each other. And Stephen, marvelling at John’s silence and strangely moved by his coldness, became suddenly anxious to get at his thoughts.</p>
			<p>He said, “John⁠—I⁠—I⁠—I hope you’re not⁠ ⁠… hadn’t I better⁠ ⁠… I⁠—I mean⁠ ⁠… are you being worried much⁠ ⁠… by this?⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>His vagueness was partly due to a new and genuine nervousness and partly to calculation⁠—a half-conscious determination not to commit himself. But John perfectly understood.</p>
			<p>“No, Stephen, we’ll forget all that⁠ ⁠… you’re not to do anything.⁠ ⁠… It’s a bit trying, but I can stand it. I don’t want to upset things any more now.⁠ ⁠… Margery and you⁠ ⁠… a fresh start, you know.⁠ ⁠… Good night.” And he was gone.</p>
			<p>Stephen went slowly upstairs, astonished and ashamed, with a confused sense of humiliation and relief. And while he felt penitent and mean in the face of this magnanimity of John’s, he could not avoid a certain conceited contentment with the wisdom and success of his planning.</p>
			<p>Yes, it was very satisfactory. And now he could get on with the poem about “Chivalry.” He sat down at his table and pulled out the scribbled muddle of manuscript. But he wrote no word that night. He sat for a long time staring at the paper, thinking of the chivalry of John Egerton. And it brought no inspiration.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
