<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
			<p>Every misfortune which can happen to a man who travels Underground in London had happened to John Egerton. Worn and irritable with a sultry day at the Ministry he had jostled with a shuffling multitude on to the airless platform at Charing Cross. From near the bottom of the stairs he saw that an Ealing train was already in; more important, the train was stopping at Stamford Brook. Stamford Brook was a “nonstop station,” so that if you missed your train in the busy hours you might wait for an intolerable time. On this sweltering evening it was urgent to escape as quickly as possible from the maddening crowd of sticky citizens and simpering girls. It was urgent to catch that train. Already they were slamming home the doors. John made a nightmare attempt to hurry down the last few steps and across to that train. His way was blocked by a mob of deliberate backs, unaccountably indifferent to the departure of the Ealing train, and moving with exasperating slowness. John, with mumbled and insincere apologies, dived through the narrow alley between a portly man and a portly woman. Whistles were blowing now, but once down the stairs the way would be fairly clear to the desirable train. Only round the foot of the stairs hovered a bewildered family, a shoal of small children clinging to their expansive mother and meagre sire, wondering stupidly what they ought to do next in this strange muddle of a place. They were back from some country jaunt and bristled with mackintoshes and small chairs and parcels and spades and other impassable excrescences.</p>
			<p>John governed himself and said, “Excuse me, please,” with a difficult assumption of calm. None of them moved. John longed to seize the little idiots by the throat and fling them aside, to knock down the meagre man and trample upon him. Instead, he shouted aggressively, “Let me pass, please!”⁠—the train was moving now. The large woman looked back, with a frightened air, shot out an arm with a sharp “Mabel!” and plucked her firstborn daughter aside by the flesh of her arm pinched painfully between finger and thumb. The child screeched, but the way was clear, and John flung forward. An open door was moving almost opposite him; he had only to swing himself in. Then from nowhere appeared a youthful uniformed official, who barred the way with an infuriating aspect of authority, and slammed fast the receding door. The train slid clattering past and vanished with a parting flicker of blue flashes. The boy walked off with an Olympian and incorruptible air, not looking at John, as who should say, “Tamper not with me.” Interfering ass! John had an impulse to go after and abuse him, demonstrate with fierce argument the folly of the youth. The waiting crowd observed him with the heartless amusement of crowds, hoping secretly that he would lose his temper, provide entertainment. John saw them and controlled himself, thinking with a conscientious effort, “His duty, I suppose,” and contented himself with a long glower at the obstructive family.</p>
			<p>The next train was a Wimbledon one; the next an Inner Circle; the next a Richmond, not stopping at Stamford Brook. The endless people shuffled always down the stairs, drifted aimlessly along the platform, jostled and barged good-humouredly about the teeming trains. Government flappers congregated giggling in small groups, furtively examined by ambulant young men. In spite of the heat and the stuffy smell of humanity and the exasperation of crowded travelling there was a pleasant atmosphere of contentment and goodwill. Only here and there were the fretful and distressed, mainly countryfolk, unaccustomed to the hardships of London. Tonight the equable John was among these petulant ones, which was unusual. He was worried and depressed⁠—in no mood for a prolonged entanglement with a hot crowd. Never had he waited so long. Number 1 on the indicator now was a Putney train; Number 2 another Inner Circle⁠—what the devil did they want with so many Circle trains? And why was Stamford Brook a nonstop station? Hundreds of people used it⁠—far more than Sloane Square, for example, or <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ Park. He would write a letter to the Company about these things. The terms of his letter began to frame themselves in his mind⁠—conceived in the best Civil Service style: “It is evident⁠ ⁠… convenience of greatest number of passengers⁠ ⁠… revised program⁠ ⁠… facilities⁠ ⁠… volume of traffic⁠ ⁠…” The Putney train racketed away; Number 2 was an Ealing now. John edged up to the glaring bookstall and stood with a row of men staring idly at the dusty covers of old sevenpennies⁠—price two shillings. None of these men bought anything, only stood silent and gazed, as if in wonder at such a multitude of unbuyable books. On the cover of one of them⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Three Years with the Hapsburgs: The Thrilling Chronicle of an English Governess</i>⁠—the gaudy picture of a young woman caught his eye. It reminded him somehow of Emily Gaunt, and he turned away. He did not want to be reminded of Emily.</p>
			<p>The Ealing train came in, and John was swept in with a tight mass of people through the middle doors of a smoking carriage. The atmosphere was a suffocating mixture of hot breath and evil tobacco-smoke. The carriage was packed. Men and women stood jammed together like troops in a communication-trench. Here and there a clerk stood up with a sheepish mumble and a sallow woman sank thankfully into his seat. John stared with increasing resentment at the rows of men who did not get up⁠—tired labourers in corduroy trousers who sat on in unmoved contentment, or gross men with cigars who screened themselves behind evening papers, pretending they did not notice the standing women.</p>
			<p>The train stopped, and there was a fierce squeezing and struggling at the doors. A man behind John remembered suddenly that he wanted to get out, and began with much heaving and imprecation to hew a passage, treading violently on John’s ankle. But by now there were more people surging inwards, clinging precariously to the fringe of the mob. The train rushed on, and the man was left within it, cursing feebly. John felt glad, maliciously, ridiculously glad. But when he looked again at the sedentary gross men, the placid labourers, and at the short, pale women swaying in the centre he became righteously furious with the evil manners of the men. He felt that he would like to address them, curse them about it⁠—that fat one with the insolent leer and the cap all cock-eye, especially; he would say loudly at the next station, “Why don’t you give one of these ladies your seat?” Then the man would <em>have</em> to get up, would stand shamed before the world, while some grateful female⁠—that nurse there⁠—took his seat. Perhaps all the others would follow.</p>
			<p>Or perhaps it would happen quite differently. The man would not hear, or pretend not to hear; and he, John, would have to repeat his remark, losing greatly in dramatic force. And everyone would stare at him, as if he were a madman! Or the man would surrender his seat with a sweet smile and an apology, “Very sorry, I didn’t see”; and then the fools of women would refuse to take the seat. They would all say they were getting out at the next station; they would all simper and deprecate and behave like lunatics. The man would hover with a self-righteous, ingratiating smirk and sit down again. And John Egerton would look a fool. No⁠—it couldn’t be done. What cowards men were!</p>
			<p>A very hot and spotty man breathed disgustingly in John’s face; unable to move his body, he turned his head away to the left. On that side stood a robust young woman, with hatpins menacingly projecting from a red straw hat. Her head rocked as the train jolted: the cherries on her hat bobbed ridiculously, the naked hatpin-points swung backwards and forwards in front of John’s eye. He turned back to the disgusting breath of the spotty man.</p>
			<p>At Earl’s Court the crowd melted a little; there were no seats, but there was room to breathe⁠—room to stand by oneself, free from pressure of strange bodies. At Baron’s Court he crept into a seat. At Hammersmith a noisy mob of shopgirls and hobbledehoys surged in, and he surrendered his seat to a young woman, who was munching something. She sat down with a giggle and took her sister on her lap. Together they eyed him, with whispered jocularities. Only two more stations.</p>
			<p>The lights were out now. The train ran out through the daylight on to a high embankment, past an interminable series of dingy houses. There was more air. The filthy smoke eddied out of the narrow windows. The train rocked enormously⁠—a bad piece of line. Looking down the car from his place by the door, John saw through the haze an interminable vista of uniform right hands fiercely clinging to uniform straps, of right arms uniformly crooked, of bowed heads uniformly bent over evening papers, of endless backs uniformly enduring and dull. And as the train gave a lurch, all the elbows swung out together towards the windows, and all the bodies bent outward like willows in the wind, and all the heads were lifted together in a mute and uniform protest. It was all like some fantastic physical drill. Then he fell into the weary stupor of the habitual Underground traveller, listening semiconsciously to the insane chatter of the chuckling girls. Ravenscourt Park shot by unnoticed. The train ran on forever.</p>
			<p>Stooping suddenly, he saw the familiar letters of Stamford Brook dashing past at an astonishing speed. Surely⁠—surely the train was stopping. The porters’ room⁠—the ticket collector⁠—the passenger-shelter⁠—the Safety First pictures⁠—the advertisement of What Ho!⁠—the other name-board of the station⁠—the whole station⁠—shot maddeningly past. The train rushed on to the intolerable remoteness of Turnham Green. Hell! John Egerton uttered an audible groan of vexation. <em>Two</em> nonstop trains running! It was unpardonable. He had not even thought to look at the nonstop labels on the train at Charing Cross. It was too bad. Another matter for the letter to the Company! The women looked at his scowling face and giggled again, whispering behind their hands.</p>
			<p>From Turnham Green you might walk home; but it took nearly twenty minutes. Or if you were lucky you caught a train quickly back to Stamford Brook. As they came into the station, John saw an up-train gliding off on the other side of the same platform. Of course! just missed it! And no doubt the next one would decline to stop at Stamford Brook! Once you began having bad luck on the Underground you might as well give up all hope of improving it that day. You might as well walk. He <em>would</em> walk. But how damnable it all was!</p>
			<p>He waited with the thick crowd at the ticket gate, fumbling for his ticket in his waistcoat pocket. That was where he had put it⁠—he always did. Always in the same place⁠—as a methodical man should do. But it was not there. It was not in the other waistcoat pocket⁠—nor in his right-hand trouser pocket. “Now, then,” said an aggressive voice behind, and he stepped aside. Lost his place in the queue, now! He put down his dispatch-case and felt furiously in his pockets with both hands. The passengers dwindled down the stairs; he was left alone, regarded indifferently by the bored official. This was a fitting climax to an abominable journey.</p>
			<p>He found it at last, lurking in the flap of a tobacco-pouch, and because he had come too far he was forced to pay another penny. There was a preposterous argument. “Putting a premium on inconvenience!”</p>
			<p>He walked home at last, cursing foolishly, and adding new periods to his letter to the Company. All over London men and women walked back to their homes that evening through the hot streets, bitter and irritated and physically distressed, ruminating on the problem of overpopulation and the difficulties of movement in the hub of the world⁠—only a small proportion, it is true, as bitter and irritated as John, but every night the same proportion, every night a thousand or two. Historians, it is to be hoped, and scientists and statisticians, when they write up their estimates of that year, will not fail to record the mental and physical fatigue, the waste of tissue and nervous energy, imposed upon the citizens of our great Metropolis by the simple necessity of proceeding daily from their places of work to their places of residence. Small things, these irritations, an odd penny here, an odd ten minutes there, the difference between just catching and just missing a train, the difference between just standing for twenty minutes, and just sitting down⁠—but they mounted up! They mounted up into vast excrescences of discourtesy and crossness; they made calm and equable and polite persons suddenly and amazingly abrupt and unkind.</p>
			<p>John Egerton was seldom so seriously ruffled; but then it was seldom that so peculiarly unfortunate a journey concluded so peculiarly painful a day. A sticky and intolerable day. A “rushed” and ineffectual day. “Things” had shown a deliberate perversity at the office, papers had surprisingly lost themselves and thereafter surprisingly discovered themselves at the most awkward moments; telephone girls had been pert, telephone numbers permanently engaged. The Board of Trade had behaved execrably. John’s own Minister had been unusually curt⁠—jumpy.</p>
			<p>And hovering at the back of it all, a kind of master-irritation, which governed and stimulated every other one, was the unpleasant memory of Emily Gaunt.</p>
			<p>So that he walked down the Square in a dark and melancholy temper. And Emily Gaunt met him on the doorstep. The skinny successor of Emily Gaunt in the household of the Byrnes stood at the doorway of his house, talking timidly to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam. She had come for “some sack or other,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam explained. “And there’s no sack in this house⁠—that I <em>will</em> swear.” She spoke with the violent emphasis of all <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantams, as if the presence of a sack in a gentleman’s house would have been an almost unspeakable offence against chastity and good taste. The skinny maid turned from her with relief to the less formidable presence of John.</p>
			<p>“If you please, sir, Cook says as the missus says as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne says as⁠—as”⁠—the skinny maid faltered in this interminable forest of “as’s”⁠—“as you ’as the big sack that was in the scullery, sir, and if you’ve done with it, sir, could we ’ave it back, sir, as the man’s come for the bottles?”</p>
			<p>The sack! Emily’s sack! John had no need of the young woman’s exposition. He remembered vividly. He remembered now what Stephen had said about it⁠—in the boat⁠—under the wall. John had “borrowed” it. He remembered now. But what the devil had he borrowed it for? And why⁠—why should he have to stand on his own doorstep this terrible day and invent lies for a couple of women?</p>
			<p>And what had the man coming for the bottles to do with it, he wondered?</p>
			<p>But a lie must be invented⁠—and quickly. He said, “Will you tell <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne, I’m very sorry⁠—I took the sack out in my boat⁠—to⁠—to collect firewood⁠—and⁠—and⁠—lost it⁠—overboard, you know? Tell her I’m very sorry, will you, and I’ll get her another sack?” He tried to smile nicely at the young woman; a painful smirk revealed itself.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, sir.”</p>
			<p>The young woman melted away, and he walked indoors, feeling sullied and ashamed. He hated telling lies. He was one of those uncommon members of the modern world who genuinely object to the small insincerities of daily life, lying excuses over the telephone for not going out to dinner, manufactured “engagements,” and so on. And the fact that this lie was part of a grand conspiracy to protect a man from an indictment for murder did not commend it. On the contrary, it enhanced that feeling of “identification” with the end of Emily which he had been trying for two weeks to shake off. Oh, it was damnable!</p>
			<p>For his solitary dinner he opened a bottle of white wine⁠—a rare indulgence. He hoped earnestly that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam would be less communicative than usual. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam had cooked and kept house for him for six months. She was one of that invaluable body of semi-decayed but capable middle-aged females who move through the world scorning and avoiding the company of their own sex, and seeking for single gentlemen with households; single gentlemen without female encumbrances; single gentlemen over whom they may exercise an undisputed dominion; single gentlemen who want “looking after,” who are incapable of ordering their own food or “seeing to” their own clothes, who would, it is to be supposed, fade helplessly out of existence but for the constant comfort and support of their superior cook-housekeepers.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam was intensely superior. From what far heights of luxury and distinction she had descended to the obscure kitchen of Island Lodge could be dimly apprehended from her dignity and her vocabulary and an occasional allusive passage in her conversation. She was as the transmigrant soul of some domestic pig, faintly aware of a nobler status in some previous existence. Where or what that existence had been John had never discovered; only he knew that it was noble, and that it had ended abruptly many years ago with the inconsiderate decease of “my hubby.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam, for all her dignity, was scraggy, and had the aspect of chronic indigestion and decay. She was draped forever in funereal black, partly in memory of hubby, partly, no doubt, because black was “superior.” She walked, or rather proceeded, with an elegant stoop, her head stuck forward like an investigating hen, her long arms hanging straight down in front of her from her stooping shoulders like plumb-lines, suspended from a leaning tower. Her face was pinched and marvellously pale, and her black eyes retreated into unfathomable recesses. Her chin receded and ended suddenly in a kind of fold, from which a flabby isthmus of skin went straight to the base of her throat, like the neck of a fowl; in this precarious envelope an Adam’s apple of operatic dimensions moved up and down with alarming velocity.</p>
			<p>Like so many of the world’s greatest personalities, she had a noble soul, but she would make speeches. Her intercourse with others was one long oration. And she was too urbane. When she laid the bacon before her gentleman of the moment as he gazed moodily at his morning paper, she would ask pardon in a shrill chirp, like the notes of a superannuated yodeller, for “passing in front” of him. This used to drive John as near to distraction as a Civil Servant can safely go. And though she had watched over him for six months, she still reminded him at every meal that she was as yet, of course, ill-acquainted with his tastes, and therefore unable to cater for those peculiar whims and fancies in which he differed from the last gentleman. By keeping sedulously alive this glorious myth she was able to disdain all responsibility for her choice and treatment of his food.</p>
			<p>She served supper now with an injured air, and John knew that she must be allowed to talk during the whole meal instead of only during the fish. She always talked during the fish. It was her ration. For she was lonely, poor thing, brooding all day in her basement. But when she was offended, or hurt, or merely annoyed, it was John’s policy to allow her to exceed her ration.</p>
			<p>So now she stood in the dark corner by the door, clutching an elbow feverishly in each hand, as if she feared that at any moment her forearms might fly away and be no more seen, and began:</p>
			<p>“<em>Sack</em>, indeed! What next, I wonder? And I’m shore I hope you’ll like the fillet of plaice, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton, though reely I don’t know <em>what</em> your tastes are. We all have our likes and dislikes as they say, and it takes time learning gentlemen’s little ways. But as for seeing a sack in <em>this</em> house⁠—well, I’m shore I don’t know when you had it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton. A pore young thing that maid they have, so mean and scraggy-looking⁠—a proper misery, <em>I</em> call her. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne in that condition, too; one would think they wanted a good <em>strong</em> gairl to help about the house. The doctor was sent for this afternoon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton, and I don’t wonder it came so soon, what with the worry about that other hussy going off like that⁠—would you like the Worcester, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton? You must <em>tell</em> me, you know, if there <em>is</em> anything. I know the last gentleman would have mushroom catchup, or ketchop as they call it⁠—nothing would satisfy him but mushroom catchup, and for those as like their insides messed up with toadstools and dandelions I’m shore it’s very tasty, but, as I was saying, that Emily was a bad one and there’s no mistake, gadding off like that with a young man and not her night out, and then the sauce of her people coming round and bothering <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne about her⁠—the idea. Cook tells me <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne told them straight out about her goings on with young men all the time she’s been here, in and out, in and out night after night⁠—and⁠—”</p>
			<p>John woke up with a start.</p>
			<p>“What’s that you say, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne did <em>what</em>?”</p>
			<p>“I was just saying, sir, how <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne told Emily’s people what he thought of her when they come worrying round the other day, so Cook was telling me. A proper hussy she must have been and no mistake⁠—not Cook I mean, but that young Emily, gadding out night after night, young men and followers and the good Lord knows what all. Are you ready for your cutlet now, sir, and all that plaice left in the dish? Well, I never did, if you aren’t a poor eater, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Egerton⁠—and there’s no doubt she was out with one of them one night and went further than she meant, no doubt, but if you make your bed you must lie on it, though I’ve no doubt she’s sorry now.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam passed out into the kitchen, her voice trailing distantly away like the voices of the Pilgrims in <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Tannhäuser</i>.</p>
			<p>John sat silent, pondering darkly her disclosures. It was a fortnight now since the fatal evening of Emily Gaunt’s destruction and disposal. During that fortnight he had not once seen Stephen Byrne in private. They had met at the Underground Station; they had pressed against each other in the rattling train, shouting odd scraps of conversation with other members of The Chase; and John had marvelled at the easy cheerfulness of his friend. But since that night he had never “dropped in” or “looked in” at The House by the River in the evenings. He had never been asked to come, and he was glad. He was afraid of seeing Stephen alone, and he supposed that Stephen was afraid.</p>
			<p>He had wondered sometimes what was going on in that house, had felt sometimes that he ought to go round and be helpful. But he could not. Like all The Chase, he had heard through his domestic staff of the sudden and inexcusable disappearance of Emily Gaunt. The soundless, uncanny systems of communication, which the more skilled Indian tribes are reputed to employ, could not have disseminated with greater thoroughness or rapidity than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Byrne’s cook the precise details of the Emily mystery; how they had carried on angrily without her for three or four days, railing at her defection and lack of faith; how <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne had at last suggested that she might have met with an accident; how the police had been informed; how they had prowled about the garden and looked aimlessly under beds; how they had shaken their pompous heads again and gone away, and all the rest of it. There had been no explanation and few theories, so far, to account for the vanishing of Emily. Now <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam had given him one, invented, apparently, and propagated by Stephen. And it shook him like a blow. That poor girl⁠—as good as gold, so far as he knew⁠—should be slandered and vilified in death by the one man who should have taken care at least to keep her name clean. A fierce note of scorn and disgust broke involuntarily from him.</p>
			<p>“Coming, sir,” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam, hurrying in with the almost imperceptible bustle of a swan pressed for time. “And it’s sorry I am it’s only a couple of cutlets I’m giving you, brown and nice as they are, but could I get steak at the butcher’s today? Not if I was the King of Spain, sir, no, and the loin-chop that scraggy it was a regular piece of profiteering to have it in the shop, that it was, let alone sell it. Well, sir, as my poor hubby used to say, that young woman’s no better than she should be, and she’s come to a bad end.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Never mind her now, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam. We don’t <em>know</em> anything⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<em>Know</em> anything! I should think not, sir, for they’re all as deceiving and artful as each other, of course, and when a nice kind gentleman like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Byrne⁠—but if one can’t know one can guess⁠—a nod’s as good as a wink, they say, and I’m shore⁠—”</p>
			<p>The address continued interminably. John made himself as the deaf adder and scraped his cutlet clean in a mute fever of irritation. He felt as a man feels in a busy office, working against time at some urgent task in the face of constant interruptions. He could not fix his mind on the Emily matter, on Stephen, on the Underground Railway, or his food. There was a kind of thickness about his temples which he had noticed already at Turnham Green station, and he felt that he was not digesting. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam hammered ruthlessly on his tired head; and the ticket collector and the Board of Trade, and Emily and Stephen Byrne and the young porter at Victoria rushed indignantly about inside it. Sometimes he waved a fork distractedly at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam and asked her to fetch a new kind of sauce, to secure a moment’s respite. Soon all the sauce bottles he possessed were ranged before him, a pitiful monument of failure. And when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam swept out to organize the sweet, he shouted that he had finished, and stole out into the garden, defeated.</p>
			<p>It was a damp and misty evening, with the hint of rain. The tide was as it had been a fortnight before on the Emily evening, rolling exuberantly in. Far out in the centre a dead yellow cat drifted westward at an astonishing speed, high out of the water. He knew the cat well. For weeks it had passed up and down the river. As far up as Richmond he had seen it, and as far down as London Bridge. Some days, perhaps, it caught under a moored barge, or was fixed for a little in the piers of a bridge, or ran ashore in the reeds above Putney, or lay at low tide under Hammerton Terrace. But most days it floated protesting through the Metropolis and back again. John wondered idly for how long it would drift like that, and in what last adventure it would finally disappear⁠—cut in twain by a bustling tug, or stoned to the bottom by boys, or dragged down to the muddy depths by saturation. He thought of it straining now towards the sea, now to the open country, yet ever plucked back by the turning, relentless tide, just as it saw green fields or smelt the smell of the sea, to travel yet once more through the dark and cruel city. Once it was a kitten, fondled by children and very round and lovable and fat. And then the world had become indifferent, and then menacing, and then definitely hostile. Finally, no doubt, it had died a death of violence. John thought then of Emily, and sighed heavily. But he was feeling better now. Silence and the river had soothed him; and⁠—given quiet and solitude⁠—he had the Civil Servant’s capacity for switching his mind from urgent worries to sedative thoughts. The cat, somehow, had been a sedative, in spite of its violent end. He went indoors out of the dark garden, studiously not looking at Stephen’s windows.</p>
			<p>While he was on the stairs the telephone-bell rang in his study. He took off the receiver and listened moodily to a profound silence, varied only by the sound of someone furtively picking a lock with the aid of a dynamo. Angrily he banged on the receiver and arranged himself in an armchair with a heavy book.</p>
			<p>When he had done this the bell rang again. A petulant voice⁠—no doubt justifiably petulant⁠—said suddenly, “Are you the Midland Railway?”</p>
			<p>John said, “No,” and rang off; then he thought of all the bitter and ironic things he ought to have said and regretted his haste.</p>
			<p>He sat down and lit his pipe. The accursed bell rang again, insistently, with infinitesimal pauses between the rings. He got up violently, with a loud curse. The blood surged again in his head; the ticket collector and the maddening train and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam crowded back and concentrated themselves into the hateful exasperating shape of the telephone. He took off the receiver and shouted, “<em>Hullo! hullo!</em> What is it? What is it? Stop that ringing!” There was no answer; the bell continued to ring. He had banged his pipe against the instrument, and the first ash was scattered over the papers on the table. He took it out of his mouth, and furiously waggled the receiver bracket up and down. He had heard that this caused annoyance, if not actual pain, to the telephone operator, and he hoped fervently that this was true. He wanted to hurt somebody. He would have liked to pick up the instrument and hurl it in the composite face of the evening’s persecutors. His pipe rolled off on to the floor.</p>
			<p>He shouted again, “Oh, <em>what</em> is it? <em>Hullo! hullo! hullo!</em>”</p>
			<p>The ringing abruptly ceased, and a low, anxious voice was heard: “Hullo! hullo! hullo! Is that you, John? Hullo!”⁠—Stephen’s voice.</p>
			<p>“Yes; what is it?”</p>
			<p>“Can you come round a minute? I <em>must</em> see you. It’s <em>urgent</em>.”</p>
			<p>“What about?” said John, with a vague premonition.</p>
			<p>“About⁠—about⁠—you know what!⁠—about the other night⁠—you <em>must</em> come! I can’t leave the house.”</p>
			<p>“No, I’m damned if I do⁠—I’ve had enough of that.” At that moment John felt that he hated his old friend. The accumulated annoyances of the day merged in and reinforced the new indignation he had felt against Stephen since the sack incident and the revelations of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bantam. He had had enough. He refused to be further entangled in that business.</p>
			<p>Then Stephen spoke again, appealingly, despairingly. “John⁠—you <em>must</em>! It’s⁠—it’s <em>come up</em>.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
